Source: Citizen Advice
UK IMMIGRATION RULE
How changes to immigration rules might affect you
This advice applies to England. See advice for See advice forNorthern Ireland, See advice forScotland, See advice forWales

Help us improve our website
Take 5 minutes to tell us if you found what you needed on our website. Your feedback will help us give millions of people the information they need.

Last updated: 17 October 2025

On 12 May 2025, the government announced plans to change UK immigration rules. They explained the changes in a ‘white paper’ - this is a type of government plan. Most of the plans in the white paper aren’t law yet and might change.

The plans might affect what visas you’ll be able to apply for after the rules change. They might also affect how long you have to wait before you can get indefinite leave or citizenship in the UK.

We’ll keep updating this page as we find out more about the government’s planned changes to immigration rules.

Applying for indefinite leave to remain or citizenship
Currently, most people on a ‘route to settlement’ can apply to live in the UK permanently after 5 years. This is called getting ‘indefinite leave to remain’ (ILR). The government plans to increase the wait to at least 10 years. 

The change will apply to most visas that let you get ILR - for example work visas. Refugees will also have to wait more than 5 years before they can apply for ILR.

We don't expect the changes to affect family visas. We don't know yet if it will affect people already in the UK on visas.

These new rules mean you’ll have to wait longer to get British citizenship - you can only apply for this when you have ILR. 

The government have said there might be exceptions for people who ‘make a contribution to the economy or society’. For example, this might include volunteering in the community. The exceptions would let people apply earlier for ILR or citizenship. We don’t know how these exceptions will work yet.

If you already have indefinite leave to remain or settled status
If you’re thinking of applying for British citizenship, it’s best to apply as soon as possible.

This is because the changes might mean you'll need to show you've been living in the UK for 10 years.

If you haven’t already taken your ‘Life in the UK’ and English tests, you should also take them soon. The changes might mean the tests will be harder.

Check if you can apply for British citizenship.

Health and Care Worker visas
You might be affected by the changes to immigration rules if both of the following apply:

you have a Health and Care Worker visa - or you want to apply for one

you work or want to work in the adult social care sector

Your job is in the adult social care sector if for example you’re a community support worker, home care worker or residential care worker. Adult social care doesn't include working with children, or working as a doctor, nurse or health professional.

If you're in the UK on a Health and Care Worker visa
Your visa will still be valid and you’ll still be able to extend your visa so you can stay in the UK longer.

If you're in the UK on a different visa and want to switch to a Health and Care Worker visa
There’s a new rule if you want to be sponsored by an employer in the adult social care sector. You must work for them for at least 3 months before you can apply to switch your visa. From 22 July 2028, you will not be able to switch to be sponsored by an employer in the adult social care sector.

If you live outside the UK
Since 22 July 2025, you can't apply for Health and Care Worker visas for jobs in the adult social care sector.

Skilled worker visas
The rules for skilled worker visas changed in July 2025. You’ll now usually only get a new skilled worker visa if you need a degree-level qualification to do your job.

The government have said there will be exceptions until the end of 2026. You'll be able to apply for jobs in sectors with staff shortages, even if they don't need a degree-level qualification. If you get a visa in this situation, you will not be able to bring your family to the UK as dependants. Check which jobs are in sectors with staff shortages on GOV.UK.

From 8 January 2026, you'll have to show you have a higher level of English when you first apply for any of the following visas:

Skilled worker

High Potential Individual

Scale-up

Currently, you have to show you're at least level 'B1' on the ‘Common European Framework of Reference for Languages’ (CEFR) scale. From 8 January 2026 you'll have to show you're at least level 'B2'.

Graduate visas
If you’re a student and you graduate from a UK university, you can currently apply for a ‘Graduate visa’ to stay in the UK for 2 or 3 years.

From 1 January 2027, if you graduate with a PhD you’ll still be able to stay in the UK for 3 years. If you graduate with a Bachelor’s or Master’s degree, you’ll only be able to stay in the UK for 18 months.

If you’re already on a Graduate visa, the new rules will not affect you.

Refugees and people with humanitarian protection
Refugees and people with humanitarian protection will have to wait more than 5 years before they can apply for indefinite leave to remain (ILR). 

The government have also closed the ‘Refugee Family Reunion’ route to new applications. This route allowed people with refugee status or humanitarian protection to bring family members to the UK. The family members will have to apply for family visas instead.

Family visas
There weren't any changes to family visas in the white paper. The government have said there will be a consultation on family visas - we don’t know when this will happen.

If you’re in the UK on a family visa, you need to live in the UK for 5 years to apply for indefinite leave to remain. We don’t expect this to change to 10 years after the rules change. You can check the rules for applying for indefinite leave to remain.

The new rules will mean that it might be harder for family members to get visas. This includes if they:

broke immigration law - for example, if they stayed in the UK for longer than they should have

have a criminal record

English language requirements
The English language requirement will become stricter for most visas.

If you’re on a student or work visa and want to bring a partner to the UK, they’ll need to prove they have a basic level of English. If they later apply to extend their visa or to get ILR or apply for citizenship, they’ll need to show they have a higher level of English.

If you’re already in the UK, this change might affect you when you apply to extend your visa, get ILR or apply for citizenship. You might need a higher level of English than you needed when you first applied for a visa.

From 8 January 2026, you'll have to show you have a higher level of English when you first apply for any of the following visas:

Skilled worker

High Potential Individual

Scale-up

Currently, you have to show you're at least level 'B1' on the ‘Common European Framework of Reference for Languages’ (CEFR) scale. From 8 January 2026 you'll have to show you're at least level 'B2'.

If you're finding things difficult
You can speak to a trained volunteer at organisations like Samaritans or Shout.

Samaritans
Samaritans

Helpline: 116 123 (Monday to Sunday at any time)

Welsh Language Line: 0808 164 0123 (Monday to Sunday 7pm to 11pm)

Calls to Samaritans are free.

You can find other ways to get in touch with Samaritans on their website.

Shout
You can also text 'SHOUT' to 85258 to start a conversation with a trained Shout volunteer. Texts are free, anonymous and confidential from anywhere in the UK.

If you think it's an emergency
If you think your life or someone else's is at risk, you should call 999 or go to A&E if you can.

You can also find a list of urgent mental health services on the Mind website.

Help us improve our website
Take 5 minutes to tell us if you found what you needed on our website. Your feedback will help us give millions of people the information they need.
Check if you can get pre-settled status or settled status
This advice applies to England. See advice for See advice forNorthern Ireland, See advice forScotland, See advice forWales

Help us improve our website
Take 5 minutes to tell us if you found what you needed on our website. Your feedback will help us give millions of people the information they need.

You need permission to live in the UK if you're from a country in the EU, European Economic Area (EEA) or Switzerland.

The EEA includes EU countries and Norway, Iceland and Liechtenstein.

Your options for staying in the UK depend on your situation. 

The deadline for most people to apply for pre-settled or settled status through the EU Settlement Scheme was 30 June 2021. You might still be able to apply if you’re in one of these situations:

you started living in the UK by 31 December 2020 and have a good reason for making a late application - you must include evidence to prove this

your family member has pre-settled or settled status and you want to join them in the UK

you have a valid biometric residence permit or visa - other than indefinite leave

If you’re not in any of these situations, you can only stay in the UK as a visitor for up to 6 months. If you want to live in the UK, you’ll need a work, study or family visa. You can check if you can get a visa on GOV.UK.

If you’re a British or Irish citizen, you don’t need permission to stay in the UK. If you have family members who aren’t British or Irish, you can check if your family can stay in the UK.

If you applied to the EU Settlement Scheme by 30 June 2021
If you already have pre-settled or settled status from the EU Settlement Scheme, you have permission to stay in the UK.

If you applied on time and you’re waiting for a decision, you can check how to prove your rights in the UK.

If you started living in the UK by 31 December 2020
If you haven't applied to the EU Settlement Scheme yet, what you need to do depends on your immigration status.

You should check if you can make a late application for pre-settled or settled status if:

you don't have a biometric residence permit or visa

you have indefinite leave

If you have a valid biometric residence permit or visa, you need to apply for pre-settled or settled status before your leave expires. This doesn’t count as a late application. 

If you started living in the UK after 31 December 2020
If you have a family member in the UK with pre-settled or settled status, you might be able to apply to stay with them in the UK under the EU Settlement Scheme. Your relationship with them must have started before 31 December 2020.

You can also apply for your child if they were born after 31 December 2020.

You can only apply to stay with your family member if you have either:

an EEA or EU Settlement Scheme family permit - you must apply within 3 months of arriving in the UK

a residence card

a valid visa - for example, a work, study or family visa

If you came to the UK as a visitor and are a citizen of a country outside the EU, EEA or Switzerland, you’ll need to leave and apply from outside the UK.

Find out more about applying to the EU Settlement Scheme as a family member, including applying from outside the UK.

If you’re not eligible to apply as a joining family member, you can’t apply to the EU Settlement Scheme. If you want to live in the UK, you’ll need a work, study or family visa. You can check if you can get a visa on GOV.UK.


If you’re a citizen of a country outside the EU, EEA or Switzerland
Making a late application to the EU Settlement Scheme
If you missed the deadline to apply to the EU Settlement Scheme, your rights in the UK have changed.

The deadline to apply for most people was 30 June 2021. If you’ve come to the UK since then to join a family member with EU or EEA citizenship, your deadline to apply is 3 months after you entered the UK.

You can make a late application if you had a good reason for missing the deadline - you should do this as soon as possible. You must include evidence to show why you couldn’t apply on time.

You might have a good reason if:

you couldn’t apply on time for practical reasons

you couldn’t apply on time for compassionate reasons

you didn’t know you needed to apply

There might be other good reasons why you couldn’t apply on time.

If you couldn't apply on time for practical reasons
You might have a good reason if you're making a late application because:

you were homeless 

you're disabled or have other support needs

you were in prison and you didn’t have access to advice or documents

You can also make a late application if you couldn’t get the evidence you needed in time. If you’re waiting for a new passport or national identity card, you can still make a late application. You’ll need to:

ask your embassy for a letter confirming you’ve applied for a new passport or identity card

apply to the EU Settlement Scheme on a paper form - find out more about applying on a paper form

If you couldn't apply on time for compassionate reasons
You might have a good reason if you’re making a late application because you:

have experienced domestic abuse

are a child and your parents didn’t apply for you

are a child in care or you recently left care

are a trafficking victim

If you didn't know you needed to apply
You might have a good reason if you’re making a late application because you:

had a ‘permanent residence document’ - this is sometimes called a ‘document certifying permanent residence’

have been living in the UK for a long time  - and your landlord or employer told you after 30 June 2021 that you didn’t need to apply

travelled out of the UK after 30 June 2021 then came back to the UK - and you weren’t told at the UK border that you needed to apply

Proving your reasons for making a late application
When you make a late application, you should say what your reasons are.

You must include evidence to show why you're making a late application.

Your evidence should:

show you have a good reason for not making your application until now

account for the entire time since the deadline

If you’re from the EU, EEA or Switzerland and entered the UK on a visitor visa, you’ll need to include evidence to prove the date you entered the UK - for example, with a ticket or an entry stamp.

Talk to an adviser if you're not sure what evidence to use.

If you don’t have a good reason for making a late application
If the Home Office decides you don’t have a good reason for making a late application, it will be considered ‘invalid’ and you won’t have a right to appeal.

You won't usually be able to prove you have a good reason for making a late application if you’ve applied to the EU Settlement Scheme previously and were refused. Your previous application shows that you were aware of the deadline and able to apply on time.

Talk to an adviser before you make a late application.

Check what your rights are if you haven’t applied
If you arrived in the UK by 31 December 2020 and you haven’t applied to the EU Settlement Scheme yet, you don’t have permission to be in the UK. This will affect your rights.

If you make a late application, you’ll get your rights back while you’re waiting for a decision.


If you want to leave the UK and come back again

If you get benefits or want to make a new claim

If you want to work or study

If you want to bring family to the UK
Check what you need to apply for
What you need to apply for depends on how long you’ve lived in the UK and if you’ve applied to stay in the UK before.

If you’ve spent time living in the Channel Islands or the Isle of Man, this counts as time living in the UK.

If you’ve lived in the UK for less than 5 years
You should make a late application for pre-settled status. To get it, you'll need to prove you:

lived in the UK for at least 1 day on or before 31 December 2020

haven’t left the UK for more than 6 months since 31 December 2020

If you get pre-settled status, you can live and work in the UK for up to 5 years. 

While you have pre-settled status, you can leave the UK for a total of 6 months in any 12-month period. If you're away for more than 6 months, you might lose your pre-settled status.

After you’ve lived in the UK for 5 years in a row, you should apply for settled status to stay for longer. The 5 years can include time before you got pre-settled status.

Find out more about what you need to apply for pre-settled status.

If you retired or had to stop working
If you get a UK State Pension, you’ll automatically get settled status if your late application to the EU Settlement Scheme is successful.

You might get settled status if you've lived in the UK for less than 5 years and any of the following apply:

you had to stop working permanently because of an accident or illness

you retired early

you stopped working when you reached State Pension age - check your State Pension age on GOV.UK

Talk to an adviser before you apply.

If you've lived in the UK for 5 years or more
You should make a late application for settled status.

If you get settled status, you can:

live and work in the UK for as long as you like

live outside the UK for up to 5 years in a row without losing your status - 4 years if you're Swiss

bring your family to live in the UK

apply for British citizenship 1 year after getting your status - or immediately if your husband, wife or civil partner is a British citizen

Find out what you need to apply for settled status.


If you have a ‘permanent residence’ document

If you have ‘indefinite leave to remain’ or ‘indefinite leave to enter’

If you or your child were born in the UK

If you're a Maltese or Cypriot citizen
Claiming benefits and getting help with housing
If you have settled status, you can apply for benefits or help with housing from your local council.

If you have pre-settled status, you can apply for benefits and housing help if you also have a ‘right to reside’ - this depends on things like your work and family.

You can check if you have a right to reside for benefits and check if you have a right to reside for housing.

Talk to an adviser if you’re worried about claiming benefits and getting help with housing.

Help us improve our website
Take 5 minutes to tell us if you found what you needed on our website. Your feedback will help us give millions of people the information they need.

Check if your family members can get pre-settled status or settled status
This advice applies to England. See advice for See advice forNorthern Ireland, See advice forScotland, See advice forWales

Help us improve our website
Take 5 minutes to tell us if you found what you needed on our website. Your feedback will help us give millions of people the information they need.

If you’re an EU, EEA or Swiss citizen living in the UK, some of your family can also apply to come and live in the UK. They can apply for pre-settled or settled status from the EU Settlement Scheme if both:

you have pre-settled or settled status

your relationship with your family member started by 31 December 2020 - unless you’re a Swiss citizen

If your family member is a child who was born after 31 December 2020, you can also apply for them to come and live in the UK.

If you came to the UK on a visa after 31 December 2020, you can't use the EU Settlement Scheme to bring your family to the UK. You’ll need to check if your visa allows you to bring your family to the UK.

The EEA includes EU countries and also Iceland, Liechtenstein and Norway.

If your long-term partner is already in the UK
Your partner can apply to the EU Settlement Scheme as a 'long-term partner' if:

they aren't married to you

they've been in a long-term relationship with you since before 31 December 2020

Your long-term partner must prove they have permission to be in the UK to apply to the EU Settlement Scheme. They can do this using either a residence card or a family permit.

If your partner has been living in the UK since 31 December 2020, they can also apply if they have a valid visa - this could be a family, work or student visa. Your partner will need to make a late application to the EU Settlement Scheme. Your partner should check if they can apply for pre-settled status or settled status.

If your partner doesn’t have a residence card, family permit or visa
They'll need to leave the UK and apply for a family permit. They can only apply for a family permit when they've been outside the UK for 6 months. Check if your partner can apply for a family permit.

How your family member applies to the EU Settlement Scheme depends on where they’re from and their immigration status. It‘s important to check how your family member should apply before they come to the UK.

If you’re a British or Irish citizen
There are some situations when your family members can apply for pre-settled or settled status.


If you’re a British citizen

If you’re an Irish citizen
Before your family member comes to the UK
Before your family member comes to the UK, check:

if they can apply to come to the UK - this depends on their relationship to you

if they should apply to the EU Settlement Scheme before they arrive - this depends on what citizenship they have and their immigration status

Check if your family member can apply to come to the UK
Only some of your family members can apply - it depends on how you’re related to them. 

You should also check what evidence they’ll need to prove they’re related to you.


Children under 21 years old

Children over 21 years old

Husbands, wives and civil partners

Long-term partners

Parents and grandparents

Brothers, sisters and other family members
Check how your family member should apply 
How your family member should apply depends on what citizenship they have and their immigration status.

If your family member is an EU, EEA or Swiss citizen
Your family member should usually apply to the EU Settlement Scheme as a family member before they come to the UK. They’ll need to apply using the government’s ‘EU Exit’ app.

When they’ve got pre-settled or settled status, they can come and live in the UK.

Find out more about applying to the EU Settlement Scheme from outside the UK on GOV.UK.

If your family member can’t use the app to apply to the scheme, they can apply for a family permit instead. If they come to the UK on a family permit, they can apply to the scheme when they arrive. Your family member can apply for a family permit on GOV.UK.

The permit doesn’t give your family member the right to claim benefits or get help with housing in the UK. They might get these rights when they apply for or get pre-settled or settled status.

If your family member already has a valid visa, they can come to the UK on their visa and apply to the scheme when they arrive.

If your family member is a citizen of a country outside the EU, EEA or Switzerland
How your family member should apply depends on if they have a residence card.


If your family member has a residence card

If your family member doesn’t have a residence card
When your family member applies
When your family member applies, they’ll need to give your name. They’ll also need to give the application number you got when you applied for pre-settled or settled status. 

Your application number is 16 digits long. You can find it on your:

decision letter - if you’ve already got pre-settled or settled status

application certificate - this would have been emailed to you when you applied

You can check what your family member needs to do to apply for pre-settled or settled status.

If your family member isn’t eligible for the EU Settlement Scheme
They can only live in the UK if they can get a work, study or family visa. You can check if your family member can get a visa on GOV.UK.

Your family member can visit the UK for up to 6 months.

If your family member isn’t from the EU, EEA or Switzerland, they might need to pay for a visa to visit the UK. If your family member is in this situation, they’re known as a ‘visa national’. You can check if your family member is a visa national on GOV.UK.
Preparing to apply for pre-settled and settled status
This advice applies to England. See advice for See advice forNorthern Ireland, See advice forScotland, See advice forWales

Help us improve our website
Take 5 minutes to tell us if you found what you needed on our website. Your feedback will help us give millions of people the information they need.

The deadline for most people to apply for pre-settled or settled status from the EU Settlement Scheme was 30 June 2021. 

You can only apply to the scheme after this deadline if you:

have a good reason for making a late application - check if you can make a late application

are upgrading from pre-settled to settled status

are applying to join a family member in the UK - find out more about joining family

have a valid work, study or family visa

You don't need to be in the UK to apply.

If you’re having problems applying to the scheme, talk to an adviser.

Members of your family might also be able to apply to the EU Settlement Scheme – even if they’re not from the EU, EEA or Switzerland.

They might be able to apply if both of the following are true:

you have pre-settled or settled status

your relationship with them started by 31 December 2020 – unless you’re a Swiss citizen

If your family member is a child born after 31 December 2020, you can also apply to the EU Settlement Scheme for them.

You can find out more about bringing family to the UK.

The EEA includes EU countries and Iceland, Liechtenstein and Norway.

Gather everything you need to apply
You need:

an identity document - your passport, national identity card, biometric residence card or permit

a digital photo - you can take a selfie during the application

your National Insurance number or proof of how long you've lived in the UK

a mobile phone number

an email address - find out how to set up an email address on Which?

proof of your relationship if you're applying for a child or another family member - find out what evidence you can use

Decide which identity document to use
If your identity document has expired, you must renew it before you apply.

If you don’t have an identity document or can’t get hold of it, you should contact your nearest Citizens Advice. 


If you’re from the EU, EEA or Switzerland

If you’re from outside the EU, EEA or Switzerland
Proving how long you’ve lived in the UK
You usually need to prove how long you’ve lived in the UK when you apply for settled or pre-settled status.

The easiest way to prove this is to give your National Insurance number when you apply. If you don’t give your National Insurance number, you have to provide documents. 

If you’ve had months when you didn’t work or lived outside the UK, there might be gaps in your National Insurance record. You might need to provide documents to cover those gaps.

You don't need to prove how long you've lived in the UK if you have a 'permanent residence document', 'indefinite leave to remain' or 'indefinite leave to enter'.

If your child is under 21, you might have to prove they live in the UK. Find out how to apply for your family.

Find your National Insurance number
You can find your National Insurance number on a payslip or letter from HM Revenue and Customs. Phone the National Insurance helpline if you can’t find it.

HM Revenue and Customs National Insurance Helpline for employees and individuals

Telephone: 0300 200 3500

Textphone: 0300 200 3519

Telephone from outside the UK: +44 191 203 7010

Monday to Friday, 8am to 5pm

Saturday, 8am to 4pm

Your call is likely to be free of charge if you have a phone deal that includes free calls to landlines - find out more about calling 030 numbers.

Find out how to apply to the EU Settlement Scheme.

Check how much evidence you need
You can include any time you’ve lived in the Channel Islands or Isle of Man as time lived in the UK.

If you’re making a late application for pre-settled status, you only need to show you:

lived in the UK for at least 1 day on or before 31 December 2020

haven’t left the UK for more than 6 months since 31 December 2020

To get settled status, you only need evidence for 6 months out of every 12 months for 5 years in a row. It doesn’t have to be the last 5 years. You can provide evidence for a different 5-year period - as long as you haven’t lived outside the UK for 5 years in a row since then.

You might be able to get settled status even if you've lived outside the UK for more than 6 months out of any 12 months, because you were:

giving birth, seriously ill, studying, training or sent to work abroad by your employer - for 1 period of up to 12 months

on compulsory military service - for any length of time

serving in the UK armed forces or a family member of someone in the armed forces

working for the UK, Scottish or Welsh governments, Northern Ireland executive or the British Council

a family member of someone working for the UK, Scottish or Welsh governments, Northern Ireland executive or the British Council

affected by the coronavirus pandemic - for example, you worked or studied in a different place to usual, or your travel plans changed

Talk to an adviser about what you can use as evidence for these periods outside the UK.

If you already have pre-settled status, you can upgrade to settled status if you’ve spent a total of at least 2 and a half years in the UK in the last 5 years. It doesn't have to be 2 and a half years in a row.

Check what documents you can use
All documents must have your name and a date on them.

It’s best to use documents that cover a longer period of time. You can only upload 10 documents when you apply. The Home Office will contact you if they need more documents.


If you’ve had gaps in employment

If you’re self-employed or run a business

If you don’t work and your bills are in someone else’s name

If you live in a care home

If you live in a shared house

If you want to prove you’ve lived in the UK for a different 5 years

If you want to prove you arrived in the UK by 31 December 2020
If you have a 'permanent residence document'
This is sometimes called a ‘document certifying permanent residence’.

You need to enter your permanent residence document number when you apply.

You don't need to enter your National Insurance number or provide documents to show how long you’ve lived in the UK.

Find out how to apply for settled status.

If you have ‘indefinite leave to remain’
You don’t have to apply to the EU Settlement Scheme to stay in the UK after Brexit. If you do apply, you need to enter the date you were given indefinite leave to remain. You might find it in a letter from the Home Office or on a stamp in your passport.

Find out more about staying in the UK after Brexit. 

Find out how to apply for settled status.

If you’ve been convicted of a crime or are waiting for a trial
When you apply to the scheme, you need to answer questions about crimes you’ve been convicted of in the UK or in other countries that are on your criminal record there. You also need to answer questions on crimes you’re waiting to go to court for. You only need to do this if you’re 18 or over.

What counts as a crime in the UK
You have a criminal record if you were convicted of an offence at a magistrates’ court or crown court in England and Wales. If you were convicted of an offence in Scotland, it could have been at a justice of the peace court, sheriff court or high court. 

You don't have to say if you:

went to court for something that wasn't criminal - this is called a civil matter and includes things like debt problems and family hearings

had a parking fine or a fine from a local council for breaking traffic rules - this is known as a 'penalty charge notice'

committed a driving offence and you didn't get a summons from a court

were given a warning or caution at a police station

If you think you have a criminal record or you're waiting to go to court, you should get advice from your nearest Citizens Advice before you apply. 

Important
Criminal records 
The Home Office will check UK and international criminal records. Your application could be rejected if you lie about your criminal record or a crime you’ve been charged with.

If you’re under 18
You are not asked questions about crime but the Home Office will check criminal records in the UK. If you think you have a criminal record, you should get advice from your nearest Citizens Advice before you apply. 

Find out how to apply to the EU Settlement Scheme. 

Help us improve our website
Take 5 minutes to tell us if you found what you needed on our website. Your feedback will help us give millions of people the information they need.
Applying for pre-settled and settled status
This advice applies to England. See advice for See advice forNorthern Ireland, See advice forScotland, See advice forWales

Help us improve our website
Take 5 minutes to tell us if you found what you needed on our website. Your feedback will help us give millions of people the information they need.

The deadline for most people to apply for pre-settled or settled status from the EU Settlement Scheme was 30 June 2021. 

You can only apply to the scheme after this deadline if you:

have a good reason for making a late application - check if you can make a late application

are upgrading from pre-settled to settled status

are applying to join a family member in the UK - find out more about joining family

have a valid work, study or family visa

You usually have to apply to the EU Settlement Scheme online. There are a few situations when you must use a paper form.

You don't need to be in the UK to apply.

Before you start, gather everything you need to apply. 

If you have family members who arrived in the UK after 31 December 2020 there are different deadlines for their applications - find out more about bringing family to the UK.

If you’re having problems applying to the scheme or need to make a late application, contact an adviser.

If you have problems understanding English
You can get help with your application from local community groups and centres. If you need help finding a centre, contact your nearest Citizens Advice. 

Check how you should apply
You usually have to apply online. Some people must use a paper form. 

You must apply on a paper form if you don’t have or can’t get hold of your passport or national identity card. If your passport or identity card has expired and you’re applying from outside the UK, you can apply online instead.

You must also apply on a paper form if you’re not an EU, European Economic Area (EEA) or Swiss citizen and you’re:

a carer for an EU, EEA or Swiss citizen

a family member of an EU, EEA or Swiss citizen who's become a British citizen

a family member of a British citizen and you lived with them outside the UK in an EU or EEA country or Switzerland - if you're switching from pre-settled to settled status

a carer for a British citizen - if you're switching from pre-settled to settled status

The EEA includes EU countries and also Iceland, Liechtenstein and Norway.

Getting a paper application form
Call the EU Settlement Scheme Resolution Centre to ask for a paper form. It might take a few weeks for the Home Office to send out a paper form after you have asked for it.

EU Settlement Scheme Resolution Centre

Telephone: 0300 123 7379

From outside the UK: +44 203 080 0010 

Monday to Friday, 8am to 8.30pm

Saturday and Sunday, 9.30am to 4.30pm

You can ask a question about the scheme on GOV.UK - they'll reply within 5 working days.

When the paper form arrives
Your form will arrive with some of your details filled in. You should correct any mistakes - for example if your name is spelled wrong. You should tell the EU Settlement Scheme Resolution Centre about any changes you make.

You should return the form by post along with any documents and your passport photo.

If you don’t have or can’t get hold of your passport or other identity document, find out what documents you can use.

Talk to an adviser if you need help applying on a paper form.

Starting the online application
First, you have to prove your identity using your identity document.

Your identity document is your:

passport or national identity card if you're an EU, EEA or Swiss citizen

passport, 'biometric residence card' or 'biometric residence permit' if you're from outside the EU, EEA or Switzerland

Find out which document you should use depending on your circumstances.

The easiest way to do this is to scan your identity document. This means that you will not have to send it to the Home Office.

Your document must have a biometric chip to scan it. If it has a chip, it will have this symbol on it:

Biometric chip image
If your identity document doesn’t have a biometric chip you’ll have to start your application online and send your document to the Home Office.

If you’re applying from outside the UK
You must use the Home Office’s ‘EU Exit: ID Document Check’ app to scan your document on an Android phone or an iPhone 7 or above. You can’t send in your identity document.

Find out more about applying from outside the UK on GOV.UK.

Scanning your identity document
You can scan your identity document:

using an Android phone

using an iPhone 7 or above

at a document scanning centre

Scanning your document on an Android phone or an iPhone
You can use your phone or someone else’s. The phone doesn’t store the details of your identity document. 

Use the Home Office’s ‘EU Exit: ID Document Check’ app to scan your document. 

After you’ve scanned the document you’ll be taken to the online application form to continue your application. You can continue on your phone or a computer.

Check if the app will work on your phone
Your phone needs to have ‘near field communication’ (‘NFC’) to read the biometric chip in your identity document.

Find out more about checking if your phone has NFC on GOV.UK.

If the app doesn’t scan your identity document
Phone the EU Settlement Scheme Resolution Centre if you can’t get the app to scan your identity document. They can talk you through how to do it. 

EU Settlement Scheme Resolution Centre

Telephone: 0300 123 7379

From outside the UK: +44 203 080 0010 

Monday to Friday, 8am to 8.30pm

Saturday and Sunday, 9.30am to 4.30pm

You can ask a question about the scheme on GOV.UK - they'll reply within 5 working days.

Your call is likely to be free of charge if you have a phone deal that includes free calls to landlines - find out more about calling 030 numbers.

If you can't use an Android phone or an iPhone
If you don’t have an Android phone or an iPhone 7 or above and you can’t borrow someone else’s, you have 2 options: 

Go to a document scanning centre - you usually have to pay for this service

Start the application online and fill in the details of your identity document. You have to upload a digital photo of yourself and post your identity document to the Home Office at the end of the application

Start your application online on GOV.UK.

If you need help using a computer or mobile device
You can get help from the Home Office’s assisted digital service if you either:

aren’t confident using a mobile device or computer

don’t have access to a mobile device or computer

don’t have internet access

The service is provided by We Are Group.

They can help you over the phone. You might be able to visit someone or they might be able to visit you at home - this will depend on where you live. Find out how to get help from We Are Group on GOV.UK.

We Are Group

Tel: 0333 344 5675 (Monday to Friday from 9am to 6pm)

Text: 07537 416 944 - text the word VISA

Textphone (using Next Generation Text): 18001 0333 344 5675

Email: visa@we-are-digital.co.uk

Your call is likely to be free of charge if you have a phone deal that includes free calls to landlines - find out more about calling 030 numbers.

If you don't have internet access
You can use the internet free of charge at:

your local council - find your local council on GOV.UK

your local library - find your local library on GOV.UK

Filling in the online application form
You don’t have to do the online application in one go - you can save your answers and come back later. You have 70 days to fill in your application. If you don’t finish it in that time, it will be withdrawn and you’ll have to apply again. Your application will not be considered until you’ve finished it.

Applying as a family
If your child, grandchild or great-grandchild is under 21 and also applying, they can link their application to yours. They will automatically get the same status as you. Check how to link your applications.

Applying for settled or pre-settled status
You'll be asked if you've lived in the UK for 5 years of more, or less than 5 years. If you choose 5 years or more, you're applying for settled status. If you choose less than 5 years, you're applying for pre-settled status.

Proving how long you’ve lived in the UK
If you give a National Insurance number, your records will be automatically checked during your application to work out how long you’ve lived in the UK.  

You’ll be told the result of the check immediately. 

If you don't give a National Insurance number, you'll need to upload documents to prove how long you've lived in the UK.

If you applied for settled status but you're given pre-settled status
You might not get the result you were expecting if:

the automatic check can't find your record

you have gaps in your National Insurance record - for example if you didn't work for some time

The check could say you've lived in the UK for less than 5 years. If this isn't true, check the screen carefully. Then select the option that says you've lived in the UK for more than 5 years.

You'll then be asked to upload documents to prove how long you've lived in the UK. You can do that straight away or you can save your application and return to it later when you've found the documents.

Find out what documents you can use to prove how long you've lived in the UK.

Booking a biometric appointment
When you apply for pre-settled or settled status, you’ll be asked for your fingerprints and photo if both of the following apply:

you’re from outside the EU, EEA or Switzerland

you don’t already have a biometric residence card or biometric residence permit

You’ll be asked to go to one of the following places:

a UK Visa and Citizenship Application Services (UKVCAS) service point

a service and support centre

a visa application centre - if you’re applying from overseas

If you need to go to a UKVCAS service point, there are free appointments. If you can’t see a free appointment, check just after 9am every day. That’s when new appointments are made available 2 weeks in advance.

Find out more about giving your fingerprints and photo on GOV.UK.

If you’re having problems finishing your application
Contact your nearest Citizens Advice if you’re worried about:

answering questions on the application form

what evidence you should upload


If you’re having problems uploading documents

If you can’t log in to your application

If you’re having problems with your paper form
Changing your application after you submit it
Contact the EU Settlement Scheme Resolution Centre to:  

correct mistakes - for example if you think you applied for pre-settled status and you want settled status

change any of your details - for example, your home address

You can change your email address and phone number online on GOV.UK.

EU Settlement Scheme Resolution Centre

Telephone: 0300 123 7379

From outside the UK: +44 203 080 0010 

Monday to Friday, 8am to 8.30pm

Saturday and Sunday, 9.30am to 4.30pm

You can ask a question about the scheme on GOV.UK - they'll reply within 5 working days.

Your call is likely to be free of charge if you have a phone deal that includes free calls to landlines - find out more about calling 030 numbers.
Switching from pre-settled to settled status
This advice applies to England. See advice for See advice forNorthern Ireland, See advice forScotland, See advice forWales

Help us improve our website
Take 5 minutes to tell us if you found what you needed on our website. Your feedback will help us give millions of people the information they need.

If you have pre-settled status under the EU Settlement Scheme, it lasts for 5 years. At the end of the 5 years, it will usually extend by another 5 years. You don't have to apply for an extension - it will happen automatically.

The Home Office will send you an email to confirm the extension - this will happen up to 2 months before your pre-settled status expires.

You should still apply to switch to settled status once you’ve lived in the UK for 5 years. The extension to your pre-settled status means you have more time to switch - it’s best to apply as soon as you can.

If you’ve spent time living in the Channel Islands or the Isle of Man, this counts as time living in the UK.

You might not be able to get settled status after 5 years if either:

you’ve spent more than 6 months outside the UK in any 12-month period

you got pre-settled status as the family member of an EU, EEA or Swiss citizen and your or your family member’s situation has changed

Check if you’ve lived in the UK for 5 years
The day your 5 years starts depends on whether or not you’re a citizen of the EU, EEA or Switzerland.

If you’re a citizen of the EU, EEA or Switzerland
Your 5 years starts from the day you started living in the UK, not the day you got pre-settled status. You can apply for settled status before your pre-settled status expires - it's a good idea to do this as soon as you have lived in the UK for 5 years.You don’t have to wait until your pre-settled status is about to expire to apply for settled status.

If you’re a citizen of a country outside the EU, EEA or Switzerland
The rules about when your 5 years of residence starts are different depending on if you’re a close family member or an extended family member. 

You’re a close family member if you’re a:

husband, wife or civil partner

dependent parent or grandparent

child or grandchild under 21 years old

dependent child aged 21 or over

Your 5 years starts from either the day you arrived in the UK or the day you became a close family member of an EU, EEA or Swiss citizen, whichever was later. For example, if you came to the UK then married a German citizen, your 5 years starts on the day you got married. It doesn't matter if the EU, EEA or Swiss citizen didn’t have settled or pre-settled status at the time.

You’re an extended family member if you’re a:

long-term partner who isn’t married or in a civil partnership

brother or sister

aunt or uncle

niece or nephew

cousin

If you had a family permit when you arrived in the UK, your 5 years starts on that day. If you didn’t have one of these, your 5 years starts the day you got a residence card.

You can find out more about applying for pre-settled status and settled status as a family member.

You can apply for pre-settled and settled status as a family member on GOV.UK.

If you can't switch to settled status after 5 years
You can either:

apply for settled status during the 5-year extension to your pre-settled status

make a new application to get pre-settled status for another 5 years

Applying for settled status during the 5-year extension period
You can add together the time from your original period of pre-settled status and the extension period. You can then apply for settled status when you’ve lived in the UK for 5 years in a row.

You should check that the status of your family members has also been extended. If it hasn’t been extended, contact the EU Settlement Scheme Resolution Centre.

EU Settlement Scheme Resolution Centre

Telephone: 0300 123 7379

From outside the UK: +44 203 080 0010 

Monday to Friday, 8am to 8.30pm

Saturday and Sunday, 9.30am to 4.30pm

You can ask a question about the scheme on GOV.UK - they'll reply within 5 working days.

Making a new application to get pre-settled status for another 5 years
You should apply before your current pre-settled status ends.

You can usually add together the time from both periods of pre-settled status. You can then apply for settled status when you’ve lived in the UK for 5 years in a row.

You might be able to get pre-settled status again by applying as a family member. You can do this if you have a family member from the EU, EEA or Switzerland who has pre-settled or settled status. They must have been living in the UK by 31 December 2020.

You can apply as a family member whether or not your first period of pre-settled status was as a family member. Find out more about applying as a family member.

If you can’t apply as a family member, you might be able to get pre-settled status again if both of the following apply:

the time spent outside the UK was before 31 December 2020

you were back in the UK by 31 December 2020

If you’ve been out of the UK for more than 6 months
You might not be able to get settled status if you spent more than 6 months outside the UK within any 12-month period.

There are some exceptions to this. You might still be able to get settled status if you were outside the UK for up to 12 months for:

an ‘important reason’ - for example, pregnancy or study

any reason related to coronavirus - this includes shielding, caring responsibilities and following guidance not to travel

If the 5 years residence you need for settled status is broken by absences, you can still qualify if you've spent a total of at least 2 and a half years in the UK in the last 5 years. It doesn't have to be 2 and a half years in a row.

If you were out of the UK because of coronavirus
If you were out of the UK for longer than 12 months in a row because of coronavirus, this won’t break your continuity of residence. The first 12 months of your time out of the UK counts towards the 5 years you need for settled status. The rest of the time after 12 months doesn't count.

If you were out of the UK for 2 periods of between 6 and 12 months, this won’t break your continuity of residence as long as:

1 period was for an important reason

1 period was for a reason related to coronavirus

The whole of your first period out of the UK counts towards the 5 years you need for settled status. The first 6 months of the second period also counts. The rest of the second period after 6 months doesn't count.

If you were out of the UK because of military service
If you were out of the UK for longer than 12 months in a row because of military service, this won’t break your continuity of residence.

Example
Marta is a Polish citizen who has pre-settled status. She moved to the UK in January 2019.

Marta went to Poland:

for 9 months from February to September 2020 - she couldn’t come back earlier because of coronavirus

for 8 months from November 2020 to July 2021 - she gave birth and had to stay to recover from complications

These absences would not break her continuity of residence. Marta can still apply for settled status when she's been in the UK for 5 years.

Marta worked in Poland for 14 months from October 2022 to December 2023. She has lived in the UK since then. This broke her continuity of residence so she couldn’t apply for settled status 5 years after she arrived in the UK. She can now apply because she has spent more than 2 and a half years in the UK in the last 5 years.

Some people who have retired or had to stop working might be able to get settled status if they’ve lived in the UK for less than 5 years. You can find out about applying if you’re retired or had to stop working.

If you got pre-settled status as a family member and your situation has changed
If your relationship with your family member changed before you reached 5 years, you might not be able to get settled status. It depends on what has changed.


If your relationship with your partner has ended

If your family member has died

If your family member has left the UK

If you’ve stopped being dependent on your family member
If your family member is the partner of an EEA or Swiss citizen
If the partner’s situation has changed and they can’t switch to settled status, you might also not be able to get settled status. Get help from a specialist adviser.

Applying to switch to settled status
To apply to switch to settled status, you’ll need:

your identity document - your passport, national identity card, or biometric residence card or permit

a mobile number

an email address

your National Insurance Number

proof of your relationship if you're applying for a child or another family member - find out what evidence you can use

You might need to provide proof of how long you've lived in the UK if the Home Office can’t verify this from your National Insurance Number.

You can find out more about preparing to apply for settled status.

Check which identity document to use
If you're an EU, EEA or Swiss citizen your identity document is your passport or national identity card.

If you're from outside the EU, EEA or Switzerland your identity document is your passport, 'biometric residence card' or 'biometric residence permit'.

You should use the same identity document you used when you applied for pre-settled status. If your identity document has changed since then, you’ll need to update your UK Visas and Immigration (UKVI) account with details of your new identity document. You should do this before you apply to switch to settled status.

You can update your UKVI account on GOV.UK.

You can apply to switch to settled status on GOV.UK.

If your application is successful you’ll get a letter confirming your status emailed to you, and your status will change in your online account.
Problems with your settled status decision
This advice applies to England. See advice for See advice forNorthern Ireland, See advice forScotland, See advice forWales

Help us improve our website
Take 5 minutes to tell us if you found what you needed on our website. Your feedback will help us give millions of people the information they need.

After you apply to the EU Settlement Scheme, the Home Office will email you a decision letter to tell you what status they’ve given you. They'll contact you if they need more information from you before they make a decision.

It can take some time for the Home Office to process your application, so don't worry if you're still waiting for your decision letter. Check how long it takes to get a decision on GOV.UK.

If your family member also applied, they might get a decision before you - even if you linked your applications.

You can contact the EU Settlement Scheme Resolution Centre to check the progress of your application.

EU Settlement Scheme Resolution Centre

Telephone: 0300 123 7379

From outside the UK: +44 203 080 0010 

Monday to Friday, 8am to 8.30pm

Saturday and Sunday, 9.30am to 4.30pm

You can ask a question about the scheme on GOV.UK - they'll reply within 5 working days.

Your call is likely to be free of charge if you have a phone deal that includes free calls to landlines - find out more about calling 030 numbers.

If you didn’t get the status you wanted
If you’ve been given pre-settled status and not settled status, or refused a status at all, your decision letter from the Home Office will tell you why.

Your decision letter will also tell you if you can apply again or appeal the decision.
Getting visas for your partner and children to live in the UK
This advice applies to England. See advice for See advice forNorthern Ireland, See advice forScotland, See advice forWales

Help us improve our website
Take 5 minutes to tell us if you found what you needed on our website. Your feedback will help us give millions of people the information they need.

Bringing family members from Ukraine to the UK
There are special rules for family members who are Ukrainian nationals. Check the rules about bringing family members from Ukraine to the UK.

Your partner might be able to get a partner visa to either:

join you in the UK

stay in the UK if they’re already here

If your partner has children aged under 18, your partner can usually also apply for them to get child visas.

If your partner applies for a partner visa you’re called their ‘sponsor’. If they apply for visas for their children, you’ll also be the children’s sponsor.

Partner and child visas are types of family visa. To work out if your partner and their children can get family visas, you’ll need to check:

if partner and child visas are right for your situation

if you can be a sponsor

who can apply for partner and child visas

the rules about your income and savings

that where you live is safe and suitable

if your partner needs to take an English language test

if they might get refused because of how they have behaved - ‘suitability rules’

Check if partner and child visas are right for your situation
Your partner can apply:

for a partner visa for themselves

for partner and child visas at the same time

for a child visa only - so their child can join them when they already have a partner visa

It will usually cost between £1,500 and £5,000 for each person to get a family visa, depending on their situation.

Your partner’s visa will usually last for 2 years and 9 months - or 2 years and 6 months if they’re already in the UK when they apply. A child visa will last until the partner visa ends - even if it started later.

Your partner can usually apply:

to extend both types of visa before they end

for them and their children to stay in the country permanently after they’ve had a partner visa for 5 years

If you only want to sponsor your children
Your children can usually only get child visas if their parent has a partner visa - or is applying for one.

You might be able to apply for your child to live in the UK permanently instead - this is called ‘indefinite leave’. Your child can get indefinite leave if either:

you have sole responsibility for them and you have a permanent right to live in the UK

you and their other parent both have a permanent right to live in the UK - you must both be in the UK or moving to the UK with your child

You have a permanent right to live in the UK if for example you’re a British citizen or you have indefinite leave.

Check if you can get indefinite leave for your child.

Check if you can be a sponsor
You can sponsor your partner and their children if you have one of the following:

British citizenship

Irish citizenship - you must be living or have lived in the UK

indefinite leave or right of abode

settled status from the EU Settlement Scheme

pre-settled status from the EU Settlement Scheme - you must have come to the UK by 31 December 2020

refugee status or humanitarian protection

If you’re a refugee or have humanitarian protection
You can sponsor your partner and children to stay by applying for the partner and children visas under the ‘family visa’ rules.

Your partner and children can’t apply to join you under the refugee ‘family reunion’ rules any more. They must apply for partner and child visas instead.

The government has stopped letting people apply for family reunion. They might decide to let people apply later.

If your partner or children applied for family reunion before 3pm on 4 September 2025, the government will still process their application and make a decision.

If you decide to sponsor under the ‘family visa’ rules, you’ll need to show your income and savings and your partner will need to take an English language test.


If you have another type of visa

If your child was born in the UK or one of their parents has British citizenship

If you’re a citizen of the EU, Norway, Switzerland, Iceland or Liechtenstein

If you were born in Northern Ireland
Check if your partner can apply for a partner visa
Your partner can apply for a partner visa if they’re one of the following:

your husband, wife or civil partner

your fiancé(e) or proposed civil partner

your partner who you’ve been in a relationship with for at least 2 years

You must have met your partner in person, and you must intend to live together permanently. If they’re your fiancé(e) or proposed civil partner, it’s okay if you only intend to live together after your marriage or civil partnership.

If your partner is already in the UK, they can only apply if they have a visa that was for more than 6 months when they got it. They can’t apply if they’re in the UK on a visitor visa.

Your partner can’t apply if they owe £500 or more to the NHS.

You and your partner must have ended any past relationships with other people. If you were previously in a marriage or civil partnership with someone else, it must have legally ended.

If your fiancé(e) or proposed civil partner is applying
If you’ve been in a relationship for at least 2 years, it’s usually best for your partner to use that as the basis for their application. This means they:

will get a visa for 2 years and 9 months - or 2 years and 6 months if they’re already in the UK

will be allowed to work in the UK

will not have to make another application and pay another fee after they get married

If you haven’t been in a relationship for 2 years, your fiancé(e) or proposed civil partner can only apply to come to the UK for 6 months. You must get married or register a civil partnership in that time.

If your partner gets the 6-month visa, they won’t be allowed to work. After your wedding or civil partnership ceremony, they can apply for a partner visa as a husband, wife or civil partner - this will allow them to work.

Your partner can only apply for the 6-month visa if they’re outside the UK.

If you and your partner want to get married or register a civil partnership in the UK but you don’t plan to live here, they can come to the UK on a different kind of visa called a marriage visitor visa. This means they’ll have to leave the UK at the end of 6 months. Check how to get a marriage visitor visa on GOV.UK.

Check if your partner’s children can apply for child visas
When your partner applies for a partner visa, they can also apply for their children aged under 18 to get child visas at the same time.

If your partner has already got a partner visa, they can still apply for child visas for their children.

The child visas will last until the end of the partner visa.

They don't need to be your partner’s biological children - for example, they can be step-children.

If you aren’t a child’s other parent, your partner can only apply for a child visa if they have sole responsibility for them. They have sole responsibility if they’re the only person responsible for the children's upbringing and welfare.

Your partner can’t apply for a child who is independent, for example if they:

are living with a partner

have left home - unless they left home to study

Your partner doesn’t need to apply for children who already have a right to be in the UK - for example if they’re British citizens or they have indefinite leave.

Check the rules about your income and savings
You must show you have a certain amount of income or savings. This is called the ‘financial requirement’.

The normal way to meet the financial requirement is to show your income is at least a certain amount of money each year.

If your partner is already in the UK, you can add their income to yours. If they’re not in the UK yet, you can only include income they’ll still get after they move.

You’ll meet the financial requirement if either:

you’re not in the military and your joint income is at least £29,000 each year before tax

you’re in the military and your joint income is at least £23,496 each year before tax

Your income doesn’t include benefits, but it does include:

earnings from employment or self-employment in the UK 

a pension

maternity, paternity, adoption or sick pay

other income - for example from rent or shares

If your income isn’t enough
You might still be able to meet the financial requirement if either:

you and your partner have over £16,000 in savings between you

you get certain disability benefits like Personal Independence Payment (PIP) or Carer’s Allowance


If you and your partner have over £16,000 in savings

If you get disability benefits
You might still be able to get a visa if both of the following are true:

you meet the other requirements for a partner visa

you have exceptional circumstances - for example, you’d be breaking the law if you or your child lived with your partner in their country

You should get specialist immigration advice.

Check that where you live is safe and suitable
Your partner will have to show that where you live is safe, suitable and large enough for the number of people you want to live there with you. You don’t need to own your own home but you do need somewhere you can stay long term. For example you might have a tenancy agreement or a room of your own in your parents’ house.

If you live in council housing or your landlord is a housing association, you can check how many people are allowed to live in your home. This is called the ‘permitted number of persons’ (PNP). The PNP is usually on your tenancy agreement, or you can ask your landlord. Children under 1 year old aren’t included in the total, and children between 1 and 10 years old count as half a person.

If your landlord isn't a council or housing association, check your local council’s guidance about overcrowding. You can find your local council on GOV.UK.

If your partner applies for a 6-month visa as a fiancé(e) or proposed civil partner, you and your partner can live separately when they first arrive in the UK. Your partner will need to give evidence about both:

where they will live before the wedding or civil partnership ceremony - for example with family or friends

where they will live with you after the wedding or civil partnership ceremony

Check if your partner needs to take an English language test
Your partner usually needs to take an English language test before they apply for a partner visa. Their children don’t need to take an English language test.

Your partner doesn’t need to take a test if one of the following applies:

they’re a citizen of a country that’s exempt because English is an official or majority language there - for example Jamaica or the USA

they have a university degree that was taught or researched in English

they’re under 18 or over 65 years old

If your partner has a physical or mental condition that stops them passing the test, they might not have to do it. They’ll need to ask their doctor to confirm their condition:

is unlikely to change

makes it impossible for them to learn enough English - for example, a learning disability or brain injury that stops them learning the language

You can check the full rules about who needs to take an English language test on GOV.UK.

Taking an English language test
If your partner needs to pass a test, it must be at least level ‘A1’ on the ‘Common European Framework of Reference for Languages’ (CEFR) scale. This tests if they can speak in English and understand spoken English - it doesn’t test reading or writing in English.

They must use an approved test provider. You can find an approved English language test provider on GOV.UK.

If your partner can speak English well
It’s worth your partner taking a higher level test than A1 - this means they can use the result for later visa applications.

They will need to pass a test at:

level ‘A2’ when they apply to extend their partner visa

level ‘B1’ when they apply to live in the UK permanently - this is called ‘indefinite leave’

If your partner and children don’t meet the rules for family visas
Your partner and their children might be able to get a visa if an exception applies. The exceptions depend on whether they’re living inside or outside the UK when they apply.


If your partner and their children are already in the UK

If your partner and their children are applying from outside the UK
Check if your partner and child meet the suitability rules
The Home Office will refuse your partner’s visa application if they:

have already been told by the Home Office to leave the UK and never return - this is called ‘a deportation’ or ‘exclusion order’

lied in a visa application 

didn’t include important information on their application the Home Office needs to know

used false documents with their application

were sentenced to prison for 1 year or longer in any country

have repeatedly broken the law

have committed a criminal offence that caused serious harm

The Home Office might also refuse your partner's application if they:

have any criminal record

entered the UK illegally

stayed longer in the UK than they’re allowed to under their visa or leave - this is called 'overstaying’

broke a condition of their leave to remain - for example, having a paid job without permission

owe the NHS £500 or more

broke customs rules

If your child is under 18 years old, the Home Office will not usually refuse their visa application if they don’t meet the suitability rules. The Home Office will only refuse it if your child:

has committed a crime

is at risk of harm from a parent or a parent’s partner

If your partner applies from outside the UK but has an ‘entry ban’, they can’t usually apply for a family visa until the ban ends. They might have an entry ban if they previously broke immigration rules.

The Home Office can also refuse the visa application if they think your partner or child is a risk or threat to people in the UK. This is called being 'not conducive to the public good’. This means your character or things you have done in the past might mean you’re a risk to other people.

If you think your partner and child might not be suitable for family visas, you can get specialist immigration advice.

Check your partner’s rights if they get a visa
If your partner and their children get family visas, they will have the right to:

rent or buy somewhere to live

use the NHS

go to school

leave the UK and return as many times as they want

work or study - unless they have a 6-month visa as a fiancé(e) or proposed civil partner

Your partner and their children usually can’t claim most benefits or apply for council housing. This is called having a ‘no public funds’ condition. Check what benefits they can get while they have a ‘no public funds’ condition.

If your partner and their children get family visas based on exceptional circumstances or private and family life, they might be able to get benefits and council housing. If you’re not sure, check if it says ‘no public funds’ on their documents, biometric residence permit or online status.

Check the rules about staying in the UK at the end of the visa
Your partner can apply to extend their visa and their children’s visas before they end. The extension will be for 2 years and 6 months.

If your partner got a 6-month visa as a fiancé(e) or proposed civil partner, they need to apply after your wedding or civil partnership ceremony.

If you can’t get married or register a civil partnership within 6 months, your partner can apply for a small extension. They’ll have to explain why the ceremony hasn’t happened yet and give evidence to prove it will happen soon. Get help from a specialist adviser if you need to extend a 6-month visa.

Staying in the UK permanently
When your partner has been in the country on a partner visa for 5 years, they can usually apply to stay in the UK permanently. This is called ‘indefinite leave’. The 5 years doesn’t include any time when they were in the UK on the 6-month visa as a fiancé(e) or proposed civil partner.

If your partner gets a partner visa based on exceptional circumstances or private and family life, they can only apply for indefinite leave after 10 years.

Your partner can apply for their children to get indefinite leave at the same time as them, or when they’ve already got it. It doesn’t matter how long their children have been in the UK.

Apply for partner and child visas
Check how your partner and children can apply for family visas.

Help us improve our website
Take 5 minutes to tell us if you found what you needed on our website. Your feedback will help us give millions of people the information they need.

Staying in the UK as the parent of a child who lives here
This advice applies to England. See advice for See advice forNorthern Ireland, See advice forScotland, See advice forWales

Help us improve our website
Take 5 minutes to tell us if you found what you needed on our website. Your feedback will help us give millions of people the information they need.

If you have a child aged under 18 who lives in the UK, you might be able to get a parent visa.

If you get a parent visa and you have other children aged under 18 who need visas, you might also be able to get child visas for them. You can:

apply for the parent and child visas at the same time

apply for the child visas when you already have a parent visa

Parent and child visas are types of family visa. It will usually cost between £3,000 and £5,000 for each person to get a family visa, depending on their situation.

If the child’s other parent is your partner
If your partner is allowed to sponsor you to get a partner visa, you must apply for a partner visa instead of a parent visa. Check if you can get a partner visa.


Your parent visa will usually last for 2 years and 6 months - or 2 years and 9 months if you’re outside the UK when you apply. Child visas last until the parent visa ends - even if the child visas start later. You can usually apply:

to extend both types of visas before they end

apply for you and your children to stay in the country permanently after you’ve had a parent visa for 5 years

To work out if you and your children can get family visas, you’ll need to check:

if your child has a right to live in the UK

who can apply for parent and child visas

the rules about your income and savings

that where you live is safe and suitable

if you need to take an English language test

if you might get refused because of how you’ve behaved - ‘suitability rules’

Check if your child has a right to live in the UK
You can get a parent visa if your child is living in the UK and they have one of the following:

British citizenship

Irish citizenship

indefinite leave or right of abode

settled status from the EU Settlement Scheme

If your child has pre-settled status, you can get a parent visa but only if:

your child came to the UK by 31 December 2020

you’re outside the UK when you apply

If you’re in the UK when you apply, you can also get a parent visa if your child has been living in the UK for 7 years - this depends if it would be reasonable for them to leave the UK to live with you. For example, it wouldn’t be reasonable for them to leave if there would be a risk to your child’s health.

Check if you can apply for a parent visa
You’ll can only apply for a parent visa if one of the following applies:

you have sole responsibility for your child

your child normally lives with you

you have access rights to your child

You have sole responsibility if you’re the only person responsible for your child's upbringing and welfare. This usually means your child’s other parent isn’t involved in their life.

You have access rights if you have a right to see your child. You might have agreed this with the other parent or you might have an order from a family court. If you have access rights and you’re already in the UK you’ll need to show you’re using them - for example visiting your child regularly.

Get help from a specialist adviser if you’re not sure if you have sole responsibility or access rights.

If you’re already in the UK, you can only apply if you have a visa that was for more than 6 months when you got it. You can’t apply if you’re in the UK on a visitor visa. If you were on a visa but it has ended, get help from a specialist adviser.

You can’t apply for a parent visa if you owe £500 or more to the NHS.

If you have other children who need visas
When you apply for a parent visa, you can also apply for your other children aged under 18 to get child visas at the same time.

If you’ve already got a parent visa, you can still apply for child visas for your children.

You don’t need to apply for children who already have a right to be in the UK - for example if they’re British citizens or they have indefinite leave.

You can only apply for a child visa if either:

you have sole responsibility for them

there are very good reasons why the child needs to live in the UK - for example if there’s nowhere else they can go where someone can look after them properly

You have sole responsibility for your child if you’re the only person responsible for their upbringing and welfare. This usually means your child’s other parent isn’t involved in their life.

You can’t apply for a child who is independent, for example if they:

are living with a partner

have left home - unless they left home to study

Check the rules about your income and savings
You must show you have enough income to look after yourself without using public funds. This is called the ‘adequate maintenance’ test.

To check if you can pass the adequate maintenance test, you need to first work out how much income the government says you need each week. You then need to check if you have enough income.

Work out how much income you need each week
To work out how much income the government says you need each week, add together:

£92.05 if you’re single or £144.65 if you live with a partner

£84.66 for each child aged under 18 who will live with you

your housing costs - these are your rent or mortgage payments plus your council tax

If you live with a partner who gets benefits, don’t include any part of your housing costs that will be covered by their Council Tax Reduction, Housing Benefit or the housing element of Universal Credit.

Example
Rohan lives on his own in the UK. He applies for a parent visa - he will not be living with his child.

The total weekly income the government says Rohan needs to get a parent visa is £92.05 plus his housing costs.

Rohan’s rent is £200 each week. His council tax is £34 each week. £200 plus £34 is £234.

The total income Rohan needs each week is £92.05 plus £234. This is £326.05.

Check if you have enough income
Work out how much income you’ll get each week after tax. If you live with a partner, you can add their income to yours. You can include earnings, pensions and income from things like rent or shares.

If you have any savings, you can add them to your income - you must have had the savings for at least 6 months. Divide the amount of your savings by the number of weeks you’re applying to stay in the UK for - this is how much you can add to your weekly income.

If your total income is high enough, you pass the adequate maintenance test.

Example
Rohan is applying for a parent visa. He’s applying to stay in the UK for 130 weeks.

The total weekly income he needs to get a parent visa is £326.05.

Rohan’s weekly earnings after tax are £310 - he has no other income.

Rohan has £2,600 in savings, which he’s had for the last 6 months. £2,600 divided by 130 is £20. This is added to his income.

£310 plus £20 is £330. Rohan’s total weekly income is £330. This is more than the income he needs, so he can get a parent visa.

If your total income isn’t high enough
When you work out your total income, you might be able to include other benefits your partner gets - for example some parts of Universal Credit. It depends on your circumstances.

If you need help working out if you can pass the adequate maintenance test, talk to an adviser.

Check that where you live is safe and suitable
You’ll have to show that where you live is safe, suitable and large enough for the number of people you want to live there with you. You don’t need to own your own home but you do need somewhere you can stay long term. For example you might have a tenancy agreement or a room of your own in your parents’ house.

If you live in council housing or your landlord is a housing association, you can check how many people are allowed to live in your home. This is called the ‘permitted number of persons’ (PNP). The PNP is usually on your tenancy agreement, or you can ask your landlord. Children under 1 year old aren’t included in the total, and children between 1 and 10 years old count as half a person.

If your landlord isn't a council or housing association, check your local council’s guidance about overcrowding. You can find your local council on GOV.UK.

Check if you need to take an English language test
You usually need to take an English language test before you apply for a parent visa. Your children don’t need to take an English language test.

You don’t need to take a test if one of the following applies:

you already passed the test to get a visa - for example a partner visa

you’re from a country that’s exempt because English is an official or majority language there - for example Jamaica or the USA

you have a degree that was taught or researched in English

you’re under 18 or over 65 years old

If you have a physical or mental condition that stops you passing the test, you might not have to do it. You'll need to ask your doctor to confirm your condition:

is unlikely to change

makes it impossible for you to learn enough English - for example, a learning disability or brain injury that stops you learning the language 

You can check the full rules about who needs to take an English language test on GOV.UK.

Taking an English language test
If you need to pass a test, it must be at least level ‘A1’ on the ‘Common European Framework of Reference for Languages’ (CEFR) scale. This tests if you can speak in English and understand spoken English - it doesn’t test reading or writing in English.

You must use an approved test provider. You can find an approved English language test provider on GOV.UK.

If you can speak English well
It’s worth taking a higher level test than A1 - this means you can use the result for later visa applications.

You will need to pass a test at:

level ‘A2’ when you apply to extend your parent visa

level ‘B1’ when you apply to live in the UK permanently - this is called ‘indefinite leave’

If you don’t meet the rules for parent and child visas
You and your children might be able to get family visas if an exception applies. The exceptions depend on whether you’re living inside or outside the UK when you apply.


If you’re already in the UK

If you’re applying from outside the UK
Check if you meet the suitability rules
The Home Office will refuse your visa application if you:

have already been told by the Home Office to leave the UK and never return - this is called a ‘deportation or exclusion order’

lied in a visa application 

didn’t include important information on your application the Home Office needs to know

used false documents

were sentenced to prison for 1 year or longer in any country

have repeatedly broken the law

The Home Office might also refuse your application if you:

have any criminal record

entered the UK illegally

stayed longer in the UK than they’re allowed to under their visa or leave - this is called 'overstaying’

broke a condition of their leave to remain - for example, having a paid job without permission

owe the NHS £500 or more

broke customs rules

If you apply from outside the UK but have an ‘entry ban’, you can’t usually apply for a family visa until the ban ends. You might have an entry ban if you previously broke immigration rules.

The Home Office can also refuse the visa application if they think you’re a risk or threat to people in the UK. This is called being 'not conducive to the public good.

If you’re concerned you might not be suitable for a parent visa, you can get specialist immigration advice.

Check your rights if you get a visa
If you and your children get family visas, you will have the right to:

work or study

rent or buy somewhere to live

use the NHS

leave the UK and return as many times as you want

You can’t usually claim most benefits or apply for council housing. This is called having a ‘no public funds’ condition. Check what benefits you can get while you have a ‘no public funds’ condition.

If you get a visa based on exceptional circumstances or private and family life, you might be able to get benefits and council housing. If you’re not sure, check if it says ‘no public funds’ on your documents, biometric residence permit or online status.

Check the rules about staying in the UK at the end of the visa
You can apply to extend the visa before it ends. The extension will be for 2 years and 6 months. If you have children with child visas, you can apply to extend them at the same time.

When you’ve been in the country for 5 years, you can usually apply to stay in the UK permanently. This is called ‘indefinite leave’.

If you get a visa based on exceptional circumstances or private and family life, you can only apply for indefinite leave after 10 years.

If you have children with child visas, you can apply for them to get indefinite leave at the same time as you, or when you’ve already got it. It doesn’t matter how long your children have been in the UK.

Apply for a parent visa
Check how you can apply for a parent visa.

Help us improve our website
Take 5 minutes to tell us if you found what you needed on our website. Your feedback will help us give millions of people the information they need.
Getting a permanent right to live in the UK if you have a family visa
This advice applies to England. See advice for See advice forNorthern Ireland, See advice forScotland, See advice forWales

Help us improve our website
Take 5 minutes to tell us if you found what you needed on our website. Your feedback will help us give millions of people the information they need.

Changes to immigration rules
On 12 May 2025, the government announced plans to change immigration rules. The government haven’t said when the rules about indefinite leave to remain will change.

If you’re on a family visa, you’ll still be able to apply for indefinite leave to remain. We don’t expect the new rules to affect how or when you can apply.

You can usually apply to live in the UK permanently if you’ve lived in the UK for a certain length of time on either:

a partner visa

a visa as the parent of a child living in the UK

If you get the right to live in the UK permanently this is called ‘indefinite leave’.

If your child has a child visa, you can apply for them to get indefinite leave at the same time as you apply for yourself - it doesn’t matter how long they’ve been in the UK.

It will cost over £3,000 for each person to get indefinite leave.

You should apply before your visa ends.

If your visa ends before you apply
This is called ‘overstaying’ - you’ll lose your right to work in the UK. If your visa has already ended, check what you can do if you’ve overstayed.

To work out if you can get indefinite leave, you’ll need to:

show you still have a relationship with your family member

check how long you must have lived in the UK

check the rules about your income and savings

check that where you live is safe and suitable

meet the suitability rules

check if you need to take an English language and ‘Life in the UK’ test

Show you still have a relationship with your family member
If you’ve got a partner visa, you’ll need to show you’re still living with your partner in the UK.

If your partner has died, you can apply for indefinite leave - it doesn’t matter how long you’ve been in the UK.

If your relationship with your partner has ended, check how you can stay in the UK without your partner.

If you’ve got a visa as the parent of a child living in the UK, you’ll need to show:

your child is still in the UK

you’re still responsible for your child or you have access rights and you’re visiting them regularly

If the child’s other parent is now your partner, you must apply for a partner visa instead of indefinite leave. Check if you can get a partner visa.

If you move from a parent visa to a partner visa
If you’re on the 5-year route to get indefinite leave, the 5 years starts again when you move to a partner visa.

If you’re on the 10-year route, you can add together time you spent on both types of visa.

Check how long you must have lived in the UK
You can usually get indefinite leave if you’ve been in the UK on a partner or parent visa for 5 years in a row. This is called the ‘5-year route’.

If you got your visa based on exceptional circumstances or private and family life, you can only get indefinite leave after you’ve been in the UK for 10 years in a row. This is called the ‘10-year route’. If you’re not sure, check the letter you got from the Home Office when you got the visa - it will say if you’re on the 10-year route.

If you came to the UK on a 6-month visa as a fiancé(e) or proposed civil partner, this time doesn’t count towards the 5 or 10-year routes.

It's worth applying for indefinite leave about a month before you reach 5 or 10 years. Don't wait until your visa is just about to expire.

If you’ve spent time outside the UK
You can get indefinite leave if you haven’t spent more than 180 days outside the UK in any 12-month period.

If you spent longer outside the UK, you can still get indefinite leave if both of the following apply:

you’re on the 5-year route

there were good reasons why you spent so long outside the UK - for example if you needed to go for work, study or training

If you’ve spent more than half your time on the visa outside the UK, you can’t usually get indefinite leave.

If you’re not sure if you can apply for indefinite leave, get help from a specialist adviser.

If you’ve moved between visas
If you’re on the 5-year route, the 5 years start again when you first move to a partner visa or a parent visa.

If you’re on the 10-year route, you can add together any time you’ve spent on a partner, parent or child visa.

In some cases you can also add time you spent on another type of visa that lets you get indefinite leave - for example a skilled worker visa or a UK ancestry visa. You can only do this if you came to the UK legally. You need to wait until you've been on the 10-year route for at least a year before you apply for indefinite leave.

If you haven’t been in the UK long enough to get indefinite leave
You’ll need to extend your visa until you’ve been in the UK long enough to apply for indefinite leave. Check if you can apply to extend your visa before it ends.

Check the rules about your income and savings
If you’re on the 10-year route, there are no rules about your income and savings.

If you’re on the 5-year route, you must show you have a certain amount of income or savings. This is called the ‘financial requirement’.

The rules about the financial requirement depend on which type of visa you have. If you have a visa as the parent of a child in the UK, you need to meet the ‘adequate maintenance’ test.

If you have a partner visa, you usually have to meet the ‘full financial requirement’. If your partner gets certain disability benefits, you have to meet the adequate maintenance test instead. The disability benefits are:

Personal Independence Payment (PIP)

Attendance Allowance

Disability Living Allowance (DLA)

Carer's Allowance

Severe Disablement Allowance

Industrial Injuries Disablement Benefit

Armed Forces Independence Payment or Guaranteed Income Payment under the Armed Forces Compensation Scheme

Constant Attendance Allowance, Mobility Supplement or War Disablement Pension under the War Pensions Scheme

Police Injury Pension


If you need to meet the full financial requirement

If you need to meet the adequate maintenance test
Check that where you live is safe and suitable
If you’re on the 10-year route, there are no rules about where you live.

If you’re on the 5-year route, you’ll have to show that where you live is safe, suitable and large enough for you and the people you live with. You don’t need to own your own home but you do need somewhere you can stay long term. For example you might have a tenancy agreement or a room of your own in your parents’ house.

If you live in council housing or your landlord is a housing association, you can check how many people are allowed to live in your home. This is called the ‘permitted number of persons’ (PNP). The PNP is usually on your tenancy agreement, or you can ask your landlord. Children under 1 year old aren’t included in the total, and children between 1 and 10 years old count as half a person.

If your landlord isn't a council or housing association, check your local council’s guidance about overcrowding. You can find your local council on GOV.UK.

Check if you meet the suitability rules
The Home Office will refuse your indefinite leave application if you:

have already been told by the Home Office to leave the UK and never return - this called a ‘deportation’ or ‘exclusion order’

lied on your application 

didn’t include important information on your application the Home Office needs to know

used false documents

were sentenced to prison for 1 year or longer in any country

have repeatedly broken the law

The Home Office might also refuse your application if you:

have any criminal record

entered the UK illegally

stayed longer in the UK than they’re allowed to under their visa or leave - this is called 'overstaying’

broke a condition of your leave to remain - for example, claiming public funds without permission

owe the NHS £500 or more

broke customs rules

If you apply from outside the UK but have an ‘entry ban’, you can’t usually apply for a family visa until the ban ends. You might have an entry ban if you previously broke immigration rules.

The Home Office can also refuse an indefinite leave application if they think you are a risk or threat to people in the UK. This is called being 'not conducive to the public good'. This means your character or things you have done in the past might mean you’re a risk to other people.

If you’re applying from outside the UK and have an entry ban to the UK, you usually can’t apply for indefinite leave until the ban ends.

If you’re concerned you might not be suitable for indefinite leave, you can get specialist immigration advice.

Check if you need to take an English language test
You usually need to take an English language test before you can apply for indefinite leave. You don’t need to take a test if one of the following applies:

you’re from a country that’s exempt because English is an official or majority language there - check which nationalities don't have to prove they understand English on GOV.UK

you have a degree that was taught or researched in English - check how to show your degree was in English on GOV.UK

you’re under 18 or over 65 years old

If you have a physical or mental condition that stops you passing the test, you might not have to do it. You'll need to ask your doctor to confirm your condition:

is unlikely to change

makes it impossible for you to learn enough English - for example, a learning disability or brain injury that stops you learning the language 

You can get a form for your doctor to fill in on GOV.UK.

Taking an English language test
If you need to pass a test, it must be at least level ‘B1’ on the ‘Common European Framework of Reference for Languages’ (CEFR) scale. This tests if you can speak in English and understand spoken English - it doesn’t test reading or writing in English.

You must use an approved test provider.

If you passed a test when you first applied for your visa or you extended it, check what level it was. If it was at level ‘A1’ or ‘A2’, you’ll still need to take a test at level B1. If you passed a test at level B1, you don’t need to take another one.

You can find an approved English language test provider on GOV.UK.

Check if you need to take a ‘Life in the UK’ test
You usually need to take a ‘Life in the UK’ test before you apply for indefinite leave. The test asks questions about UK laws and the legal system, working and other details of life in the UK. 

You can do the test any time before you apply.

You only need to take a test if you’re at least 18 years old and you’re under 65 years old.

If you’re aged 60 to 64 and can show you’re unlikely to pass the test before you turn 65, the Home Office might agree you don’t have to do the test. For example, if you're receiving medical treatment for a serious illness.

If you have a physical or mental condition that stops you passing the test, you might not have to do it. You'll need to ask your doctor to confirm your condition:

is unlikely to change

makes it impossible for you to pass the test - for example, a learning disability or brain injury that stops you remembering facts

You can get a form for your doctor to fill in on GOV.UK.

Doing the test
You can do the test as many times as you need to - but you have to pay a fee each time. 

You need to study the official handbook to pass the test. You can also buy an app to practise - search for the official Life in the UK Test app by TSO (The Stationery Office). 

Some colleges offer short courses to help prepare for the test. You'll have to pay a fee to attend.

You can book the Life in the UK Test and buy the official handbook on GOV.UK.

If you don’t meet the rules to get indefinite leave
You might be able to apply to extend your visa instead - for example if you haven’t passed the English language and Life in the UK tests. Check if you can extend your visa.

Check your rights if you get indefinite leave
If you get indefinite leave, this gives you almost all the same rights as a British citizen, including the rights to:

work or study

rent or buy somewhere to live - including applying for council housing

claim benefits

use the NHS

go to school

leave the UK and return as many times as you want

You’ll usually only lose your indefinite leave if you’re outside the common travel area for more than 2 years in a row. The common travel area is the UK, Ireland, Guernsey, Jersey and the Isle of Man.

Apply for indefinite leave
Check how you can apply for indefinite leave.

Check if your child can get a permanent right to live in the UK
This advice applies to England. See advice for See advice forNorthern Ireland, See advice forScotland, See advice forWales

Help us improve our website
Take 5 minutes to tell us if you found what you needed on our website. Your feedback will help us give millions of people the information they need.

Bringing family members from Ukraine to the UK
There are special rules for family members who are Ukrainian nationals. Check the rules about bringing family members from Ukraine to the UK.

You might be able to apply for your child to live permanently in the UK - this is called ‘indefinite leave’. You can only apply if your child is aged under 18 - unless they’re already in the UK on a child visa.

If you apply for your child to get indefinite leave, you’re called their ‘sponsor’. It might cost over £3,000 to get indefinite leave for your child.

You’ll need to check:

if you can sponsor your child

if your child can apply for indefinite leave

the rules about your income and savings

that where you live is safe and suitable

if your child meets the suitability rules

Check if you can sponsor your child
You can sponsor your child to apply for indefinite leave if either:

you and your child’s other parent both have a permanent right to live in the UK - you must both be in the UK or moving to the UK with your child

you have sole responsibility for your child and you have a permanent right to live in the UK

You have sole responsibility if you’re the only person responsible for your child's upbringing and welfare. This usually means your child’s other parent isn’t involved in their life.

You have a permanent right to live in the UK if you have:

British citizenship

Irish citizenship - you must be living or have lived in the UK

indefinite leave or right of abode

settled status from the EU Settlement Scheme

If you’re applying for indefinite leave, you can apply for your child at the same time. The Home Office will make a decision about your application before they make a decision about your child’s application.

If you’re a refugee or you have humanitarian protection
Your child can apply to join you under the refugee ‘family reunion’ rules if they were conceived or adopted before you had to leave your country. It’s free and easier to apply, and you don’t need to have indefinite leave.

Check how your child can apply for family reunion on GOV.UK.


If you or the child’s other parent don’t have a permanent right to live in the UK

If your child was born in the UK or one of their parents has British citizenship

If you’re a citizen of the EU, Norway, Switzerland, Iceland or Liechtenstein

If you were born in Northern Ireland
Check if your child can apply for indefinite leave
If your child is outside the UK, they must be aged under 18 to apply for indefinite leave.

If your child is already in the UK, they can only apply for indefinite leave if they have a child visa. They can still apply if they’re over 18 years old. They might have got a child visa if their parent had either:

a partner visa

a visa as the parent of a child in the UK - this will be a different child

Example
Toshiya is a Japanese citizen who lived in Japan. Toshiya has sole responsibility for his daughter, Hana. Hana is also a Japanese citizen.

When Hana was 14, Toshiya married a British citizen, Anita. Anita moved back to the UK and Toshiya got a partner visa to move with her. Hana stayed in Japan to continue her education.

When Hana finished her education at 16, she got a child visa to come to the UK. She could do this because Toshiya had a partner visa.

Toshiya has now got indefinite leave. Hana is 19.

Hana can apply for indefinite leave because Toshiya has sole responsibility for her and he has an immigration status that lets him be a sponsor. She can apply even though she is in the UK and aged over 18 because she has a child visa.

If your child is in the UK and aged over 18, they will usually need to pass both a ‘Life in the UK’ test and an English language test before they apply. You can:

check the rules about Life in the UK tests on GOV.UK

check the rules about English language tests on GOV.UK

find an English language test provider on GOV.UK

If your child hasn’t passed the tests, they can still apply for extra time to live in the UK - this is called ‘limited leave’. They should make it clear they’re applying for limited leave - the application will cost less. Once your child has passed the tests, they can immediately apply for indefinite leave.

If your child is independent
You can’t sponsor your child if they’re independent, for example if they:

are living with a partner

have left home - unless they left home to study

If they aren’t your biological or adopted child
You can sponsor the child if you’re their legal guardian.

You might also be able to sponsor the child if both of the following apply:

you’re related to them or you’re their step parent

there are serious reasons why they should be allowed to come to the UK - for example because there’s no-one else who could look after them anywhere else

Get help from a specialist adviser if you want to sponsor a child when you’re not their parent.

If you want to adopt a child from overseas, there are different rules - get help from a specialist adviser.

Check the rules about your income and savings
If you or your partner is applying for indefinite leave at the same time
You’ll need to pass a different test called the ‘financial requirement’. Check the rules about applying for indefinite leave for adults.

You must show you’ll have enough income each week to look after your child. This is called the ‘adequate maintenance’ test.

To check if you can pass the adequate maintenance test, you need to first work out how much income the government says you need each week. You then need to check if you have enough income.

Work out how much income you need each week
To work out how much income the government says you need each week, add together:

£92.05 if you’re single or £144.65 if you live with a partner

£84.66 for each child aged under 18 who will live with you - this includes the child applying for indefinite leave and any other child who will live with you

your housing costs - these are your rent or mortgage payments plus your council tax

When you’re working out your housing costs, don’t include any part of the costs that will be covered by Council Tax Reduction, Housing Benefit or the housing element of Universal Credit.

Example
Alisha’s child is applying for indefinite leave from outside the UK. Alisha has sole responsibility for her child and doesn’t have a partner.

The total weekly income Alisha needs to sponsor her child is £92.05 plus £84.66 plus her housing costs.

Alisha’s rent is entirely covered by the housing element of Universal Credit. This means her only housing cost is council tax.

Alisha’s council tax is £30 each week. She gets Council Tax Reduction of £10 each week. £30 minus £10 is £20. This means she needs £20 income for council tax each week.

The total income Alisha needs each week is £92.05 plus £84.66 plus £20. This is £196.71.

Check if you have enough income
Work out how much income you’ll get each week after tax. If you live with a partner, you can add their income to yours. You can include earnings, pensions and income from things like rent or shares.

If you have any savings, you can add them to your income - you must have had the savings for at least 6 months. Divide the amount of your savings by 52 - this is how much you can add to your weekly income.

If your total income is high enough, you meet the adequate maintenance test.

Example
Alisha’s child is applying for indefinite leave from outside the UK. Alisha has sole responsibility for her child and doesn’t have a partner. The total weekly income she needs to sponsor her child is £196.71.

Alisha’s weekly earnings after tax are £160 - she has no other income.

Alisha has £2,600 in savings, which she’s had for the last 6 months. £2,600 divided by 52 is £50. This is added to her income.

£160 plus £50 is £210. Alisha’s total weekly income is £210. This is more than the government says she needs, so Alisha can sponsor her child.

If your total income isn’t high enough
When you work out your total income, you might be able to include other benefits you get - for example some parts of Universal Credit. It depends on your circumstances.

If you need help working out if you meet the adequate maintenance test, talk to an adviser.

Check that where you live is safe and suitable
You’ll have to show that where you live is safe, suitable and large enough for the number of people you want to live there with you. You don’t need to own your own home but you do need somewhere you can stay long term. For example you might have a tenancy agreement or a room of your own in your parents’ house.

If you live in council housing or your landlord is a housing association, you can check how many people are allowed to live in your home. This is called the ‘permitted number of persons’ (PNP). The PNP is usually on your tenancy agreement, or you can ask your landlord. Children under 1 year old aren’t included in the total, and children between 1 and 10 years old count as half a person.

If your landlord isn't a council or housing association, check your local council’s guidance about overcrowding. You can find your local council on GOV.UK.

If your child doesn’t meet the rules to apply for indefinite leave
Your child might still be able to get indefinite leave. The rules depend on whether they’re living inside or outside the UK when they apply.

If your child is outside the UK
Your child might be able to get a visa if refusing the visa would lead to ‘harsh and unreasonable consequences’. This might be the case if you would have difficulty living with your child anywhere else in the world - for example if you have other children who can’t go with you.

Get help from a specialist adviser if you want to apply based on harsh and unreasonable consequences.

If your child is in the UK
The rules are complicated. Get help from a specialist adviser.

Check if your child meets the suitability rules
The Home Office will refuse your child’s indefinite leave application if they:

have already been told by the Home Office to leave the UK and never return - this is called a ‘deportation’ or ‘exclusion order’

lied on their application 

didn’t include important information on their application the Home Office needs to know

used false documents

were sentenced to prison for 1 year or longer in any country

have repeatedly broken the law

The Home Office might also refuse your child’s application if they:

have any criminal record

entered the UK illegally

stayed longer in the UK than they’re allowed to under their visa or leave - this is called 'overstaying’

broke a condition of their leave to remain - for example, claiming public funds without permission

owe the NHS £500 or more

broke customs rules

If your child applies from outside the UK but has an ‘entry ban’, they can’t usually apply for a family visa until the ban ends. They might have an entry ban if they previously broke immigration rules.

The Home Office can also refuse the visa application if they think your child is a risk or threat to people in the UK. This is called being 'not conducive to the public good. This means your character or things you have done in the past might mean you’re a risk to other people.

If you’re concerned your child might not be suitable for a family visa, you can get specialist immigration advice.

Check your child’s rights if they get indefinite leave
If your child gets indefinite leave, this gives them almost all the same rights as a British citizen, including the rights to:

work or study

rent or buy somewhere to live - including applying for council housing

claim benefits

use the NHS

go to school

leave the UK and return as many times as they want

They’ll usually only lose their indefinite leave if they’re outside the common travel area for more than 2 years in a row. The common travel area is the UK, Ireland, Guernsey, Jersey and the Isle of Man.


Getting a visitor visa for family and friends
This advice applies to England. See advice for See advice forNorthern Ireland, See advice forScotland, See advice forWales

Help us improve our website
Take 5 minutes to tell us if you found what you needed on our website. Your feedback will help us give millions of people the information they need.

Your friend or family member can apply for a visitor visa so they can visit you in the UK. Visitor visas are usually for up to 6 months.

Bringing your partner to the UK to get married or register a civil partnership
Your partner can’t use a standard visitor visa to come to the UK to get married or register a civil partnership.

If you and your partner want to live in the UK after you get married or register a civil partnership, check if they can apply for a partner visa.

If you and your partner don’t want to stay in the UK together, your partner can come to the UK on a marriage visitor visa. This means they’ll have to leave the UK within 6 months. Check how to get a marriage visitor visa on GOV.UK.

Check if your visitor needs a visa
You’ll need to check if they need a visitor visa on GOV.UK if you don’t already know - it depends on their nationality.

If your visitor doesn't need a visa, they might need to get an electronic travel authorisation (ETA) before they travel to the UK. You can check if your visitor needs an ETA on GOV.UK.

Some visitors can scan their own passport at an ‘eGate’ instead of speaking to an immigration officer. Check who can use the eGates on GOV.UK.

If they can't use an eGate, they should still be prepared to explain why they’re visiting when they get to the border. If the Border Force thinks they might try to stay longer, they can refuse them entry

If you’re helping your visitor apply for a visitor visa
They’ll have to apply online.

Make sure your visitor puts their information in where it asks for the applicant’s details.

After you fill in the form, the visitor will need to have their fingerprints and photograph taken at a visa application centre. Check where their nearest visa application centre is before you apply, because it might be in a different country.

The online form asks you some questions to get to the visa you need. 

If you need more support with your application 
You should consider getting specialist advice if you’re unsure about the application. It might cost you money but it can save you time and hassle. Your local Citizens Advice can either help you or let you know where to get expert advice.

Documents you’ll need to include
You’ll need to include documents that support their application when you send it off. The online form will give you guidance on what to include, but here are some things to keep in mind.

If your documents aren’t in English or Welsh, you’ll need to provide certified English translations of your documents with the originals. Each translation has to include:

confirmation from the translator that it’s an accurate translation of the original

the date of the translation

the translator's full name and signature

the translator's contact details

Prove they’ll be returning to their country after their visit
You could show proof your visitor has a job or studies to go back to in their home country. You can also show they have family who depend on them in their home country.

Prove there’s enough money for the trip
You’ll have to provide evidence to show that the visitor’s trip can be afforded, whether it’s being paid for by them or by you. 

If the visitor is paying for themselves, they’ll have to include documents proving that they can afford it, for example bank statements or payslips.

If you’re paying for their visit (eg for their flights and accommodation), you’ll need to prove that you can afford the visitor’s trip as well as your own costs - for example your rent, mortgage and general expenses.

Include:

an estimate of how much the trip will cost - this needs to be as accurate as possible

proof of your income and where you work, for example payslips or an employment contract

proof that you have enough money to pay for the visitor’s stay, for example recent bank statements

proof that you’re in the UK legally, for example a copy of your passport or visa

Prove you have a genuine relationship
You’ll have to show how you’re connected to the person visiting you.

If the person visiting you is a friend, boyfriend or girlfriend, you might need to give stronger proof they’ll be returning to their country after their visit.

If your visa is refused
You can read the government’s guidance on reasons for refusing visas on GOV.UK, if you're concerned the visa you're applying for might be refused.

You can’t usually appeal if the visitor visa is refused. It's quicker and easier to apply again. Make sure you deal with the reasons your first application was refused.


Becoming a British citizen
This advice applies to England. See advice for See advice forNorthern Ireland, See advice forScotland, See advice forWales

Help us improve our website
Take 5 minutes to tell us if you found what you needed on our website. Your feedback will help us give millions of people the information they need.

British citizenship gives you the right to live and work in the UK permanently, without any immigration restrictions.

You need British citizenship before you can apply for a UK passport.

Check if you’re already a British citizen
Some people are British automatically, without applying. You should check if you’re already British if you:

have a British parent

were born in the UK or a British overseas territory

were born in a British colony before 1983

You can check if you're a British citizen on GOV.UK. 

You don’t need to apply for citizenship if you’re already British - you can apply for a UK passport immediately. Find out how to apply for a passport on GOV.UK.

Citizenship isn’t the only way to live and work in the UK permanently. You can find out if citizenship is right for you before you apply.

Check if you can apply for British citizenship
You might be able to apply for British citizenship by ‘naturalisation’ if you’re over 18 years old and you either:

moved to the UK 

were born in the UK

Naturalisation is the most common way to get citizenship if you were born outside the UK and don’t have a British parent.

Changes to immigration rules
On 12 May 2025, the government announced plans to change immigration rules. The government haven’t said when the rules about British citizenship will change.

If you're eligible for British citizenship and thinking of applying, it's best to apply as soon as possible.

This is because the new rules might mean you'll need to show you've been living in the UK for 10 years. 

If you haven’t already taken your ‘Life in the UK’ and English tests, you should take them soon. The new rules might mean the tests will be harder.

Before you apply 
You need to have permission to live in the UK permanently - for example, getting indefinite leave to remain or ‘settled status’ from the EU Settlement Scheme. You need to do this even if your husband, wife or civil partner is a British citizen.

You’ll also need to meet some other requirements. It’s easier to meet the requirements if your husband, wife or civil partner is a British citizen. There are different ways you could meet the requirements if you’re a citizen of a country in the EU, European Economic Area (EEA) or Switzerland, or their family member. 

You should find out what status you need to have and other requirements that apply to you before you start your application.


If your husband, wife or civil partner is a British citizen

If you or your family are from the EU, Norway, Switzerland, Iceland or Liechtenstein

If you're an Irish citizen

If you're from any other country
Getting British citizenship
There are a few ways you can be eligible to apply for citizenship. Most adults who have migrated to the UK get citizenship by applying to ‘naturalise’. You can find out how to apply for British citizenship. 

Getting British citizenship for children 
Your children can also apply for British citizenship at the same time as you.

Some children can apply before you do if either: 

they were born in the UK

their other parent became British first 

You can find out about getting British citizenship for children.

Check other ways you can be eligible for citizenship
There are some other ways you can apply for citizenship. You can find out on GOV.UK if you’re eligible because you:

were born in the UK

have a British parent

are stateless

have another type of British nationality (such as ‘British overseas citizen’)

have a connection with a past or present British territory (such as Gibraltar)

Help us improve our website
Take 5 minutes to tell us if you found what you needed on our website. Your feedback will help us give millions of people the information they need.

Getting British citizenship for children
This advice applies to England. See advice for See advice forNorthern Ireland, See advice forScotland, See advice forWales

Help us improve our website
Take 5 minutes to tell us if you found what you needed on our website. Your feedback will help us give millions of people the information they need.

If you want to get British citizenship for your child, you can apply to ‘register’ them as a British citizen. Registering is a way of applying for British citizenship. 

Your child needs British citizenship before they can get a UK passport.

If your child is over 18 years old, they’ll need to apply as an adult - check citizenship eligibility for adults.

If your child is under 18, it’s important to check if applying for citizenship is the right thing for them. It can cost over £1,000 and you won’t get your money back if your application is refused or your child is already British.

If you can’t afford the fee
You can apply for a ‘fee waiver’. If you get a fee waiver, you will not have to pay the fee.

To apply for a fee waiver, you have to show you don’t have enough income and savings to pay for both the fee and essential costs like food and rent. You’ll need to send documents showing your income and spending for the last 6 months, for example your:

pay slips

bank statements for all your accounts

tenancy agreement

utility bills

If social services give you money to help you look after your child, you’ll automatically get a fee waiver - you’ll need to send documents to prove this.

You can apply for a fee waiver on GOV.UK.

Check if your child is already a British citizen
Your child might have British citizenship automatically if they were born in the UK or they have a British parent.

You can check how the Home Office decide if someone is automatically a British citizen on GOV.UK.

If your child is already a British citizen, you don’t need to apply for citizenship for them. You can just apply for your child’s first passport on GOV.UK.

If you’re not sure your child is a British citizen, talk to an adviser.

If you’re pregnant or planning to have a child 
If you have permission to live in the UK permanently when your child is born, they’ll get British citizenship automatically. You’ll need to prove you have:

British or Irish citizenship

settled status from the EU Settlement Scheme

indefinite leave to remain

right of abode

permanent residence - if your child was born before 1 July 2021

If you get settled status after your child is born, they will still be a British citizen if both of the following apply:

you were eligible for settled status on 30 June 2021 - check if you can apply for settled status

they are born after 30 June 2021

If you have permanent residence, you might not have a document to prove it. If you're in this situation, talk to an adviser.

Check if you can apply for citizenship for your child
If your child isn’t already a British citizen, you might be able to apply for citizenship for them. It depends on where they were born and your immigration status.

If you’re also applying for citizenship yourself, you can apply for your child at the same time. You’ll need to fill in a different form for them.

If your child is over 10 years old, they must be ‘of good character’. Your child will usually be of good character unless they:

have a criminal conviction

travelled to the UK without a visa or electronic travel authorisation

travelled to the UK on a dangerous journey - for example, on a small boat or hidden in a vehicle

If you’re not sure your child is of good character, talk to an adviser.

If your child was born in the UK
You can apply to register your child for British citizenship if:

you got permission to live in the UK permanently after your child was born

your child's father was British or settled in the UK when your child was born

you joined the UK armed forces after your child was born

your child lived in the UK until they were 10 years old


If you got permission to live in the UK permanently after your child was born

If your child's father was British or settled in the UK

If you joined the UK armed forces after your child was born

If your child has lived in the UK for the last 10 years
If your child was born outside the UK
The rules about getting British citizenship for your child depend on your status and their status.


If you got British citizenship after your child was born

If your child’s father was British when your child was born

If you got British citizenship automatically when you were born

If your child has lived in the UK for the last 5 years

If your child has lived in the UK for the last 10 years

If your child isn’t eligible for citizenship in any country
If your child isn’t eligible for citizenship
The Home Office might grant your child citizenship: 

if your child needs to be British for their job - for example, if they plan to join the Armed Forces or they’re going to represent the UK in sport

for compassionate reasons - for example, you’re British and caring for a child in your family whose parents have died and you want to get citizenship for the child

if you can show it’s in their best interests - for example if their nationality stops them attending school trips

If you’re applying because your child needs to be British for their job or for compassionate reasons, talk to an adviser.
Deciding if citizenship is right for you
This advice applies to England. See advice for See advice forNorthern Ireland, See advice forScotland, See advice forWales

Help us improve our website
Take 5 minutes to tell us if you found what you needed on our website. Your feedback will help us give millions of people the information they need.

Changes to immigration rules
On 12 May 2025, the government announced plans to change immigration rules. The government haven’t said when the rules about British citizenship will change.

If you're eligible for British citizenship and thinking of applying, it's best to apply as soon as possible.

This is because the new rules might mean you'll need to show you've been living in the UK for 10 years. 

If you haven’t already taken your ‘Life in the UK’ and English tests, you should take them soon. The new rules might mean the tests will be harder.

Some people can already live and work in the UK - they don’t need to apply for British citizenship to stay in the UK. 

Before you apply, check:

what rights you already have

what other rights you’d get

what getting British citizenship involves - for example, how much it costs and if you can keep your current nationality 

Check if you’re already a British citizen
You don’t need to apply for citizenship if you automatically became a British citizen when you were born.

You might automatically be a British citizen if either:

one of your parents was a British citizen when you were born

you were born in the UK and one of your parents had ‘settled status’, ‘indefinite leave to remain’ or ‘permanent residence’ when you were born

You can check if you’re automatically a British citizen on GOV.UK if either: 

you have a British parent 

you were born in the UK 

Check if you can already live and work in the UK permanently
You already have the right to live and work in the UK permanently if you:

have ‘settled status’ from the EU Settlement Scheme

have ‘indefinite leave to remain’  

are an Irish citizen

are a Commonwealth citizen with ‘right of abode’

You can stay in the UK for as long as you want if you’re in one of those situations - you don’t have to apply for citizenship.


If you’re from the EU, Norway, Switzerland, Iceland or Liechtenstein

If you’re an Irish citizen

If you’re a Commonwealth citizen
Check what rights you’ll have as a British citizen
You need British citizenship if you want to:

get a British passport

vote in elections - you might already be able to vote in some elections if you’re an EU or Commonwealth citizen

leave the UK for as long as you want, without losing your ‘right to return’

get British citizenship for your children if they’re born outside the UK

If your children are born in the UK, they’ll automatically be British citizens if you have indefinite leave to remain, settled status or permanent residence when they’re born - you don’t need to be a British citizen.  

Check if you already have the right to vote
If you’re an Irish or Commonwealth citizen, you can already vote in general and local elections.

Check if you can register to vote on the Electoral Commission website.

If you want to leave the UK for a long time
You can leave the UK for:

5 years without losing settled status from the EU Settlement Scheme - 4 years if you're Swiss

2 years without losing indefinite leave to remain

If you stay outside the UK for longer than this you lose your ‘right to return’ - this means you lose your settled status or your indefinite leave to remain.

If you get British citizenship, you can leave the UK for as long as you want without losing your right to return.

If you go to prison
If it’s a serious criminal offence and you’re not a British citizen, you could lose your status and be deported. A serious offence is one which has at least a 12-month sentence. 

If you have British citizenship, you can’t usually be deported or lose your citizenship. 

You can’t apply for citizenship if you’ve already been found guilty of a serious criminal offence.

If you’ve had refugee status or humanitarian protection
If you get British citizenship, you will not be able to make a ‘family reunion’ application to bring your family to the UK for free. 

This could make it more difficult and expensive to bring family to the UK. Check how much it costs to get a family visa if you have British citizenship on GOV.UK.

You can still make a family reunion application if you have indefinite leave to remain instead of British citizenship.

Find out if you can make a family reunion application on GOV.UK.

Check if you can keep your current nationality
You can be a citizen of more than one country at the same time - this is called ‘dual citizenship’. 

Some countries don't allow their citizens to have dual citizenship. You should check if the country where you're already a citizen will let you keep your nationality and passport after you become a British citizen.

If you’re not sure if you can have dual citizenship, check the rules with your country’s consulate or embassy in the UK. 

If you’re a refugee, only contact your embassy if it’s safe for you to do so.

If you can keep your current nationality 
When you have dual citizenship, it means you can live and work in both countries - and you won’t need a visa to travel between them. You can also choose which passport to use when you travel.

If the other country makes its citizens do things like national service, you'll still have to do them if you get British citizenship.

If you get British citizenship, you can’t usually get help from the British embassy in another country where you’re also a citizen.

Example
John has dual British and American citizenship.

John is arrested in the USA. He can't get help from the British embassy in the USA because he is an American citizen.

If you're not allowed dual citizenship 
If you get British citizenship, you could lose your current nationality and passport. You might:

need a visa to visit the other country

not be allowed to own property there

not be allowed to move back

You might not be able to get your original nationality back later, even if you give up your British citizenship.

How much it costs
You usually pay £1,735 to apply for adult citizenship or £1,214 for children. If you’re applying for citizenship as an adult you’ll also have to pay:

£50 to do the Life in the UK Test

£19.20 to send your fingerprints and photo to the Home Office

around £150 if you have to do an English test

You will not get most of your money back if your application is refused - for example, if you’re not eligible or you sent the wrong documents.

You can find out more about the fees for citizenship applications on GOV.UK.

What it involves
You’ll need to allow plenty of time to prepare your application for citizenship.

You usually have to do a test on British history, traditions and everyday life, called the Life in the UK Test. You also have to gather lots of documents and evidence - for example, dates for every time you came in and out of the UK during the last 5 years.

You might also need to do a speaking and listening test to prove your knowledge of English.

Find out more about what you need to do to apply for citizenship.

When you can apply
After you get settled status, indefinite leave to remain or permanent residence, you usually have to wait 1 year before you can apply for British citizenship.

You can apply for British citizenship as soon as you get your status if you're married to, or in a civil partnership with, a British citizen.

Help us improve our website
Take 5 minutes to tell us if you found what you needed on our website. Your feedback will help us give millions of people the information they need.


Applying for British citizenship
This advice applies to England. See advice for See advice forNorthern Ireland, See advice forScotland, See advice forWales

Help us improve our website
Take 5 minutes to tell us if you found what you needed on our website. Your feedback will help us give millions of people the information they need.

Changes to immigration rules
On 12 May 2025, the government announced plans to change immigration rules. The government haven’t said when the rules about British citizenship will change.

If you're eligible for British citizenship and thinking of applying, it's best to apply as soon as possible.

This is because the new rules might mean you'll need to show you've been living in the UK for 10 years. 

If you haven’t already taken your ‘Life in the UK’ and English tests, you should take them soon. The new rules might mean the tests will be harder.

You should check if you’re eligible to apply for citizenship - there are different routes to apply.

Most adults who have migrated to the UK get citizenship by applying to ‘naturalise’.

Applying for citizenship takes time and you will not get your money back if your application is refused.

Check how much it costs to apply
You usually pay £1,735 to apply for adult citizenship or £1,214 for children. If you’re applying for citizenship as an adult you’ll also have to pay:

£50 to do the Life in the UK Test

around £150 if you have to do an English test

You will not get most of your money back if your application is refused - for example, if you’re not eligible or you sent the wrong documents.

You can find out more about the fees for citizenship applications on GOV.UK.

If you’re applying for a child and you can’t afford the fee
You can apply for a ‘fee waiver’. If you get a fee waiver, you will not have to pay the fee.

To apply for a fee waiver, you have to show you don’t have enough income and savings to pay for both the fee and essential costs like food and rent. You’ll need to send documents showing your income and spending for the last 6 months, for example your:

pay slips

bank statements for all your accounts

tenancy agreement

utility bills

If social services give you money to help you look after your child, you’ll automatically get a fee waiver - you’ll need to send documents to prove this.

You can apply for a fee waiver on GOV.UK.

Check what you need to apply
Before you apply for citizenship, it’s worth preparing what you’ll need. 

When you apply for citizenship through naturalisation, you’ll need to: 

prove how long you’ve lived in the UK

pass the Life in the UK Test 

prove you understand English 

check you’re of ‘good character’ - this means showing you haven't recently broken the law or gone bankrupt

give the names of 2 people who can help prove your identity - these are called ‘referees’

If you're applying for citizenship for your child
You’ll need to make a separate application for your child. 

If your child is under 18 years old, you can apply to ‘register’ them as a British citizen. Registering is a way of applying for British citizenship. 

The application process is easier for children - they don't have to:

pass the Life in the UK Test 

prove their knowledge of English 

do the citizenship ceremony

You can check if your child can get British citizenship and what form you should use.

Prove how long you’ve lived in the UK 
You usually need to prove how long you’ve lived in the UK - this is called the ‘residency requirement’.  

You need to prove your residency even if you've done it before - for example, by applying for 'settled status'. 

The length of time you need to prove will depend on your situation.

These are the steps you should follow:

1. Work out when you were in the UK
You should work out exactly when you were in the UK during the last: 

3 years if you’re married to or in a civil partnership with a British citizen 

5 years if you’re not married to or in a civil partnership with a British citizen

To help with this, you could make a list of the dates you travelled outside the UK by:

checking old calendars

checking travel bookings

looking for exit and entry dates stamped in your passport

You also need to make sure you were in the UK on the same day 3 or 5 years ago as the day you’re applying. If you weren’t in the UK exactly 3 or 5 years ago, it’s usually best to wait until it’s been 3 or 5 years since the date you returned to the UK and then apply. If you were out of the UK for a long time, talk to an adviser.

2. Check what absences from the UK are allowed 
You should check how many days you were outside the UK - if it's over the limit you might be refused. You'll need to separately count these for the:

3 or 5 years you’re providing evidence for in your application 

12 months before you apply

You can be out of the UK for up to 90 days in the year before you apply. If you were away for longer, you could delay applying. This would mean your absence is counted in the 3 or 5 years you’re using in your residence requirement. 

3. Check you have the evidence to show you were in the UK 
You’ll need to give the Home Office your current passport and old passports that cover the time you’ve been in the country. If you have any entry and exit stamps in your passport, check they match the dates you’ve said you were in and out of the country on your application.

Check if your passport has an entry stamp for when you first entered the UK. You might not have one if for example you’re an EU citizen.

If you don’t have a passport with an entry stamp, you’ll need other evidence to show you were in the UK, for example:

payslips and P60s

a letter from your employer or education provider with start and end dates

a letter from a benefits provider like the Department for Work and Pensions (DWP) showing when you got benefits

You might also be able to use other evidence, like household bills.

If you don’t have a passport or travel documents because you’re a refugee, the Home Office should accept that you didn’t leave the UK after you arrived.

Pass the Life in the UK Test 
You need to pass the Life in the UK Test before you apply for citizenship. 

The test asks questions about UK laws and the legal system, working and other details of life in the UK. 

You can do the test any time before you apply.

Check if you need to do the test 
You don’t need to pass the Life in the UK Test if:

you’ve already passed it - for example, if you took the test when you applied for 'indefinite leave to remain' 

you’re under 18 or over 65 years old

If you’re aged 60 to 64 and can show you’re unlikely to pass the test before you turn 65, the Home Office might agree you don’t have to do the test. For example, if you're receiving medical treatment for a serious illness.

If you have a physical or mental condition that stops you passing the test, you might not have to do it. You'll need to ask your doctor to confirm that your condition:

is unlikely to change

makes it impossible for you to pass the test - for example, a learning disability or brain injury that stops you remembering facts

You can get a form for your doctor to fill in on GOV.UK. 

Doing the test 
You can do the test as many times as you need to - but you have to pay a fee each time. 

You need to study the official handbook to pass the test. You can also buy an app to practise - search for the official Life in the UK Test app by TSO (The Stationery Office). 

Some colleges offer short courses to help prepare for the test. You'll have to pay a fee to attend.

You can book the Life in the UK Test and buy the official handbook on GOV.UK.

Prove you understand English
You need to prove you understand English, Welsh or Scottish Gaelic before you can apply for citizenship. 

Check if you need to prove you understand English
You don’t need to prove you understand English if:

you’re from a country that’s exempt - check which nationalities don't have to prove they understand English on GOV.UK

you have a degree that was taught or researched in English - check how to show your degree was in English on GOV.UK

you’re under 18 or over 65 years old

If you’re aged 60 to 64 and can show you’re unlikely to learn English before you turn 65, the Home Office might agree you don’t have to prove your knowledge of English. For example, if you're receiving medical treatment for a serious illness.

If you have a physical or mental condition that stops you passing the test, you might not have to do it. You'll need to ask your doctor to confirm that your condition:

is unlikely to change

makes it impossible for you to learn English - for example, a learning disability or brain injury that stops you learning the language 

You can get a form for your doctor to fill in on GOV.UK.

Proving you understand English
You'll need to pass a speaking and listening test at an approved centre - you can find a secure English language test provider on GOV.UK.

The test costs around £150. Tests are usually valid for 2 years - if you’ve already done a test, you can check your English language test is still valid on GOV.UK. 

Check you’re of good character 
You usually need to prove you’re of good character before you can apply for citizenship. 

The Home Office look at a range of things to decide this.

For example, the Home Office might decide you’re not eligible if you have:

unpaid taxes in the UK

an NHS debt 

been declared bankrupt

a criminal record

broken a condition of your leave in the last 10 years - for example working or claiming public funds without permission

travelled to the UK without a visa or electronic travel authorisation

travelled to the UK on a dangerous journey - for example, on a small boat or hidden in a vehicle

If you have any points on your driving licence, you must print a summary of your record from the DVLA website and include it with your application.

You should say if you've received any fixed penalty notices in your application. Your good character won't be affected, as long as you've paid them.

It’s important to be honest and include anything that’s relevant to your application - for example, a criminal conviction. If the Home Office finds you've left something out, they might refuse to accept your application.

If you think you’ll have problems with proving you are of good character, you should talk to an adviser before you apply.

Provide 2 referees
You’ll need to give the names of 2 referees on your application. These are people who know you and can help prove your identity. 

Both of your referees should have known you personally for more than 3 years. They must not be: 

your relative

your solicitor or agent 

employed by the Home Office 

They can't be a referee if they've had a criminal conviction in the last 10 years, unless a certain period of time has passed. This is called the ‘rehabilitation period’. For example, the rehabilitation period for a fine is 1 year. You can find the rehabilitation periods on GOV.UK.  

Your referees should include: 

a person who has 'professional standing' - for example, a civil servant of any nationality

a person who is a British passport holder and either has professional standing or is over the age of 25

The Home Office has a list of people they accept as referees - they’re called ‘acceptable professional persons’. 

Before you apply, check the list and the rest of the rules for referees in the nationality guidance on GOV.UK. The list of who can be a referee is under 'Commonly used terms'.

Check your application carefully
It’s important to check you have the right information and documents before you apply. If something is missing or wrong, the Home Office can refuse to accept your application and you will not get your money back.

If the Home Office decide you lied on your application, they might stop you applying again for 10 years.

If you need help preparing your application 
You should talk to an adviser if you need help with completing your application or providing evidence. 

How to apply 
You can usually apply for citizenship online or by post. 

If you’re from the Channel Islands, Isle of Man or a British Overseas territory, you must apply by post.

It's a good idea to send your paper application by recorded delivery, so you can make sure it's delivered.

Find out more about applying if you’re married to or in a civil partnership with a British citizen on GOV.UK. 

If you're not married or in a civil partnership with a British citizen, the way you apply will depend on your current immigration status. You can find out how to:

apply if you have indefinite leave to remain or settled status on GOV.UK

apply if you have permanent residence status on GOV.UK

Submit your documents 
If you’ve applied on a paper form, you’ll need to submit your documents - for example, send your passport with your application.  

If you’ve applied online, you can scan your documents and upload them to your online application - you don’t have to physically send them to the Home Office. 

It’s a good idea to download or print a copy of your finished application for your records.

Book your biometric appointment 
You’ll usually get an email asking you to book an appointment to have your photograph and fingerprints taken. These are called your ‘biometric information’.

The appointments are run by a company called TLScontact. You can check how to book an appointment on the TLScontact website.

You can check what to bring and if anyone needs to go with you on GOV.UK.

After you’ve applied 
You need to tell the Home Office if you change your personal details during this time. For example, if you change your address. 

The amount of time you wait for the Home Office’s decision will not affect your existing rights in the UK - for example, you can continue to work or claim benefits.

The Home Office will write to you if they need more details about your application. You should reply within 2 weeks if you can. If the Home Office doesn't hear from you by then, they might make a decision on your application based on the information they already have.

UK Visas and Immigration (UKVI) will try to make a decision about your application within 6 months, but it might take longer. If you’re worried about a delay, you can:

contact UKVI to check if there’s a problem with your application - check how to contact UKVI on GOV.UK

make a complaint about the delay - check how to complain to UKVI on GOV.UK

Travelling outside the UK before you get British citizenship 
You can travel outside the UK if you’ve applied for British citizenship. You should make sure you can get emails and letters about your application while you’re away. 

Organise a citizenship ceremony 
If your application is successful, you must arrange a citizenship ceremony. These are usually held at your local council. Find out more about booking your citizenship ceremony on GOV.UK. 

Replace or correct a UK citizenship certificate 
You’ll have to pay a fee to replace or correct a UK citizenship certificate. Find out more about replacing or correcting your citizenship certificate on GOV.UK.

Travelling outside the UK after you get British citizenship 
If you want to travel outside the UK after getting British citizenship, you’ll need to apply for a British passport. 

Make sure the details on your current passport are the same as your citizenship certificate. For example, check your name is spelled the same. If any of the details are different, you will not get a British passport.

You can find out more about how to apply for a British passport on GOV.UK.

Register to vote 
Becoming a British citizen means you can vote in all elections or referendums. You can register to vote on GOV.UK. 

If your application is unsuccessful 
If your application is unsuccessful, the Home Office will write to you and tell you why. 

It will not affect your current right to stay in the UK.

Help us improve our website
Take 5 minutes to tell us if you found what you needed on our website. Your feedback will help us give millions of people the information they need.
Check if your immigration status lets you get benefits and help with housing
This advice applies to England. See advice for See advice forNorthern Ireland, See advice forScotland, See advice forWales

Help us improve our website
Take 5 minutes to tell us if you found what you needed on our website. Your feedback will help us give millions of people the information they need.

If you’re not a British citizen, you should check if your immigration status lets you claim ‘public funds’. Public funds include most benefits, applying for social housing or making a homeless application.

You should also check what you can do if you can claim public funds but you have a partner or child who can’t.

If you’re struggling because you’re not allowed to claim public funds, there might be other support you can get. You might also be able to apply to get access to public funds.

If you’ve recently arrived in the UK
For some benefits, you must have been living in the UK for a certain amount of time before you can claim - for example Personal Independence Payment (PIP).

To claim many other benefits or get help with housing, you need to show the UK is your main home and you plan to stay here. This is known as being ‘habitually resident’ in the UK. It’s harder to show you’re habitually resident if you’ve recently arrived in the UK - unless you were living in Ireland, Jersey, Guernsey or the Isle of Man.

You have to meet these requirements even if you’re allowed to claim public funds. If you have refugee status or humanitarian protection, you will not have to meet these requirements.

Check the rules for the benefit you want to claim.

Check if your immigration status lets you claim public funds
You’re always allowed to claim public funds if you have any of the following:

British or Irish citizenship

settled status from the EU Settlement Scheme

indefinite leave - unless you came to the UK on an adult dependent relative visa

refugee status or humanitarian protection

right of abode

If you don’t have a right to be in the UK, you can’t claim public funds.


If you have pre-settled status from the EU Settlement Scheme

If you came to the UK on an adult dependent relative visa

If you’re waiting for a decision from the EU Settlement Scheme
If you have any other immigration status
Check your immigration documents, including:

your biometric residence permit

your decision letter from the Home Office

your online immigration status if you have one

You’re not usually allowed to claim public funds if it says ‘no public funds’ or ‘no recourse to public funds’ on your documents. This is called having a ‘no public funds condition’.

If your immigration documents don’t say you have a no public funds condition, you can claim public funds.

If you came to the UK as a visitor, you have a no public funds condition. This includes if you scanned your passport at an ‘eGate’ and didn’t get any immigration documents.

If your visa has ended
The rules depend on whether you applied to change or extend your visa before it ended.

If you applied before your visa ended and you’re waiting for a decision, you still have the same rights as under your old visa. Check your documents to see if you were allowed to claim public funds.

If you didn’t apply to change or extend your visa on time, you can’t claim public funds. If you were already getting benefits, you need to tell your benefits provider your visa has ended - they will stop your benefits. If you don’t tell them, you’ll have to pay the benefits back later. Check what you can do if your visa has ended.

Check what benefits are included in public funds
If you’re not allowed to claim public funds, this includes claiming any of the following benefits from the government:

Universal Credit

Pension Credit

Child Benefit

Personal Independence Payment (PIP)

Disability Living Allowance (DLA)

Attendance Allowance

Carer’s Allowance

Winter Fuel Payments and Cold Weather Payments

Funeral Payments

Sure Start Maternity Grants

You’re also not allowed to claim the following benefits that Universal Credit is replacing:

income-related Employment and Support Allowance (ESA)

income-based Jobseeker’s Allowance (JSA)

Income Support

You’re also not allowed to claim any of the following benefits from your local council:

Housing Benefit

Council Tax Reduction - or Council Tax Support or Council Tax Benefit

Discretionary Welfare Payments

welfare assistance or payments from the Household Support Fund

Check what help with housing counts as public funds
If you’re not allowed to claim public funds, this includes applying for council housing or making a homeless application to your local council.

It doesn’t count as claiming public funds if you apply for key worker housing - for example if you’re a nurse.

It also doesn’t count as claiming public funds if you’re housed by your local council because either:

your child’s health or development is at risk - you’ll be housed under the ‘Children Act’

you’re disabled and need help - you’ll be housed under the ‘Care Act’

If you apply for public funds when you’re not allowed to
Your application for public funds will usually be refused.

The Home Office might refuse any immigration applications you make in the future. They might refuse an application to:

extend your visa

change to a different visa

get a permanent right to live in the UK - this is called ‘indefinite leave’

In rare cases, the Home Office might take you to court or end your visa early.

If you’re worried that you’ve claimed public funds when you weren’t allowed to, talk to an adviser.

If your partner or child can’t claim public funds
There are extra rules if you can claim public funds but your partner or child can’t.

Claiming benefits
Some benefits aren’t affected by your partner or child. You can claim the following benefits for yourself:

Personal Independence Payment (PIP)

Attendance Allowance

Carer’s Allowance

If your child isn’t allowed to claim public funds, you can’t claim Disability Living Allowance (DLA) for them.

The rules are more complicated for other benefits - for example Universal Credit. If you get more money from benefits because of your partner or child, this might make it difficult for them to extend their visa or get indefinite leave. Talk to an adviser before you claim other benefits, or if you’re worried because you’ve already claimed them.

Applying for council housing or making a homeless application
You’re allowed to apply, but it will make it more difficult for your partner or children to extend their visa or get indefinite leave. Talk to an adviser before you apply, or if you’re worried because you’ve already applied.

Check what help you can get if you’re not allowed to claim public funds
You’re allowed to claim benefits that don’t count as public funds. This includes:

new style Jobseeker’s Allowance (JSA) - check if you can get 'new style' JSA

new style Employment and Support Allowance (ESA) - check if you can claim ‘new style’ ESA

State Pension - check if you can claim State Pension

Bereavement Support Payments - check if you can get Bereavement Support Payments

Maternity Pay or Maternity Allowance - check if you can claim Maternity Pay or Maternity Allowance

Statutory Sick Pay - check if you can claim Statutory Sick Pay

a discretionary reduction of your Council Tax - check if you can pay less Council Tax

You can use other public services - for example you can send your children to state schools.

If you have permission to be in the UK, you can use the NHS without paying - unless you have a visitor visa or you entered the UK as a visitor using an eGate. You can check the full rules about using the NHS if you’re from abroad on the NHS website.


If you have children

If you’re disabled and need help

If you’ve applied for asylum
Getting a no public funds condition removed
You might be able to apply to remove the condition if one of the following applies:

you won’t have enough money to feed yourself or your family - or afford somewhere to live

your child’s welfare might be harmed because of your low income

you don’t have enough money to live on because of exceptional circumstances - for example, if you have extra costs because you’re disabled

If you’re not on a partner, parent or British National (Overseas) visa, you also have to show it's not reasonable for you to go to the country where you're a citizen.

If you’re ready to apply, you can get the form to remove the no public funds condition on GOV.UK. You can find advice about how to apply further down on the GOV.UK page, starting where it says ‘Evidence required’.

If you need help to apply or you’re not sure if you should apply, get help from a specialist adviser.

If you’ve experienced domestic abuse
You and your children might be able to apply for indefinite leave if your relationship with your partner has ended because of domestic abuse. Check what domestic abuse is.

You must have either:

a partner visa - this doesn’t include fiancé(e) or proposed civil partner visas

pre-settled status as a partner or dependant child of an EU, EEA or Swiss citizen

You can usually apply to access benefits while you’re applying for indefinite leave. This is called applying under the ‘migrant victims of domestic abuse' (MVDA) concession.

Check the rules about applying for indefinite leave if you've experienced domestic abuse.

Extending a partner or parent visa if you’re struggling with money
If you don’t have enough money to live on, this might also affect:

how you apply to extend your visa

when you can apply for indefinite leave

If you have a partner or parent visa, you’ll be on either the ‘5-year route’ or the ‘10-year route’ to settlement in the UK. This affects when you can apply for indefinite leave.

If you’re not sure which route you’re on, check the letter that came with your visa or permit. If it doesn’t say which route you’re on, you’re probably on the 5-year route.

If you’re on the 5-year route, you’ll need to have a certain amount of income or savings when you apply to extend your visa or get indefinite leave. This is called the ‘financial requirement’. You need to meet the financial requirement even if the no public funds condition is removed.

If you don't meet the financial requirement, you’ll need to apply to move to the 10-year route instead. This means you’ll have to wait longer before you can get indefinite leave. Talk to an adviser if you want to move to the 10-year route.
Check if your immigration status lets you get free healthcare
This advice applies to England. See advice for See advice forNorthern Ireland, See advice forScotland, See advice forWales

Help us improve our website
Take 5 minutes to tell us if you found what you needed on our website. Your feedback will help us give millions of people the information they need.

Some NHS treatment is free and available to anyone who needs it. This includes:

treatment in a hospital Accident and Emergency department

registering with a GP - and going to GP appointments

family planning services

treatment for some infectious diseases - for example coronavirus

compulsory psychiatric treatment

You will still have access to free NHS healthcare even if your leave says you can’t access public funds. 

Most people have to pay for some NHS services, like dental treatment, prescriptions and glasses. You might not have to pay for these services if you can get certain benefits like Income Support or asylum support. 

If you have to pay for healthcare, you might be able to get help - check if you can get help with health costs.

Check if you can get other free NHS services 
You might have to pay for other NHS services - these services are called ‘secondary healthcare’. Whether you can get free secondary healthcare depends on the length and purpose of your residence in the UK and your immigration status, not your nationality. 

Secondary healthcare is care from a hospital for something that isn’t an emergency - for example, an operation to replace your hip or maternity care.

To get free secondary healthcare, you need to be ‘ordinarily resident’ in the UK. This means you normally live in the UK legally or you’re returning to live in the UK and you’re not a visitor. You might be asked to prove this.

You’ll also need to have one of the following:

British citizenship - for example, if you have dual nationality

Irish citizenship 

indefinite leave to remain

‘settled’ or ‘pre-settled’ status from the EU Settlement Scheme

applied for settled or pre-settled status and are waiting for a decision - you’ll need to show your application certificate

limited leave to remain on a work, student or family visa - you must also have paid the ‘immigration health surcharge’ unless you don’t have to pay

If you get free NHS care when you give birth, your child can also get it until they're 3 months old - as long as they stay in the UK during this time. During these 3 months, you should apply for your child to get permission to stay in the UK. If you don't, you'll have to pay for any NHS care they need after they're 3 months old.

If you applied to the EU Settlement Scheme before your treatment and your application is refused, you might still have to pay for the treatment.

If you’re just visiting the UK, you won’t get free secondary healthcare - unless you’re a visitor from Ukraine.

You’ll also get free secondary healthcare if you’re:

a victim of human trafficking - your family can also get free secondary healthcare

an asylum seeker and you get paid Asylum Support

having treatment for something caused by torture, female genital mutilation (FGM), domestic violence or sexual violence

If you’re still not sure what healthcare you can get, check if you're entitled to free secondary healthcare on GOV.UK.

Accessing treatment
If you're entitled to free treatment, you can get it immediately. You don’t need to have been in the UK for a certain amount of time.

If you don’t meet the conditions for free treatment, you must be given clear information about charges in a way you understand. This could include providing information in your own language or through an interpreter. 

If you don’t get clear information, it could be discrimination. Find out how to complain about discrimination.

Paying for hospital treatment
If you have to pay, you'll usually have to pay before you have the treatment.

If your treatment is urgent
You won't have to pay before your treatment if it’s urgent but you might still have to pay after.

If you’re not entitled to free NHS hospital treatment, you'll still get medical treatment: 

that stabilise a life-threatening condition, like renal failure 

for something you need straight away, like maternity care 

You’ll get treatment to deal with the emergency, but you might have to return home to complete the treatment once the emergency is over.

If your treatment is not urgent 
If it’s not an emergency, but treatment has to start straight away, you might be asked to sign a form that says you’ll pay. 

It’s very important to find out how much you’ll have to pay - they might not know the exact amount. If the treatment is not urgent, you can refuse it if you can’t afford it. You can delay your treatment until you can raise the money. If you can’t raise the money, you’ll be refused treatment. 

If you're entitled to free hospital treatment, but you’re being charged, you should contact the NHS Trust that’s charging you and explain why you’re entitled to free treatment.

Check if your health charges are covered by an EU or EEA country or Switzerland
You might be entitled to have your NHS healthcare paid for by another country - for example, if you live in the UK but get a state pension from the EU, EEA or Switzerland.

You’ll need to have either an:

S1 certificate - for example, if you’re a 'frontier worker'

S2 certificate - for example, if you have an S2 visa

You can find out more about when your health costs in the UK are covered by an EU or EEA country or Switzerland on GOV.UK.

If you’re visiting the UK from an EU country
You can use a European Health Insurance Card (EHIC) issued in that country. Your EHIC will cover the costs of treatment if you get ill on the visit. You can also use an EHIC from an EU country if you’re a student and either:

your course started before 1 January 2021

you’re studying in the UK for less than 6 months

If you’re visiting the UK from Norway you can use your Norwegian passport to get medically necessary healthcare for free - for example an accident or illness that can’t wait until you get home.

Help us improve our website
Take 5 minutes to tell us if you found what you needed on our website. Your feedback will help us give millions of people the information they need.
Getting an online immigration status (eVisa)
This advice applies to England. See advice for See advice forNorthern Ireland, See advice forScotland, See advice forWales

Help us improve our website
Take 5 minutes to tell us if you found what you needed on our website. Your feedback will help us give millions of people the information they need.

You should check if you can get online evidence of your immigration status - also called an ‘eVisa’. 

Most physical immigration documents have been replaced by eVisas. This includes:

biometric residence permits (BRPs)

biometric residence cards (BRCs)

stamps in passports

'vignette' stickers in passports

frontier permits

Getting an eVisa is free and won’t change your permission to live in the UK.

You’ll need to create a UK Visas and Immigration (UKVI) account to access your eVisa.

You should create an account for each person who has permission to stay in the UK - this includes your children and dependants.

If your biometric residence permit expired on 31 December 2024
You should replace your BRP with an eVisa.

You'll need to create a UKVI account to get your eVisa. Make sure you do this within 18 months of when your BRP expired. If it expired on 31 December 2024, you have until 30 June 2026.

If your BRP has expired, it doesn’t mean your visa has ended. If you’re not sure when your visa ends, you can check the letter you got from the Home Office when they approved your application.

If you still can't find when your visa ends, talk to an adviser.

Video from the Home Office - what is an eVisa?
To watch this video on our website, you need to accept video player cookies.

You can either:

accept video player cookies in your cookie settings
leave our website to watch 'What is an eVisa?'
When you'll get an online immigration status
When you'll get an eVisa depends on your situation.


If you're applying for a visa or indefinite leave

If you already have a visa or indefinite leave

If you have pre-settled or settled status
If you already have an online account
You don’t need to create a UKVI account if you already have one.

You’ll need to link your eVisa to the account.

You might already have a UKVI account if you’ve applied for:

pre-settled or settled status from the EU Settlement Scheme

a student visa

a British National (Overseas) visa - and you’re from Hong Kong

You’ll need the ‘UK Immigration: ID Check’ app to confirm your identity and add your eVisa to the account.

If you can’t access your account 
You can get help to recover it. You’ll need to have access to the phone number and email address used to create your account. Check how to recover your UKVI account on GOV.UK.

Creating an online account
You’ll need to create a UK Visas and Immigration (UKVI) account to get an online immigration status. 

You’ll be able to use your UKVI account to:

view and prove your online status

check what rights you have in the UK

update your personal details - like your contact information

To watch this video on our website, you need to accept video player cookies.

You can either:

accept video player cookies in your cookie settings
leave our website to watch 'How to create a UK Visas and Immigration (UKVI) account and get access to your eVisa'
To create your account, you’ll need to download the ‘UK Immigration: ID Check’ app on a phone. This is so the Home Office can confirm your identity.

You’ll also need access to an email address so the Home Office can send you updates.

If you’ve already proved your identity at a Visa Application Centre or Service Support Centre, you still need to create a UKVI account.

Create a UKVI account on GOV.UK.

You can check how to download the UK Immigration: ID Check app on GOV.UK.

Scanning identity documents
To create a UKVI account, you usually need to use the app to scan either a BRP card or a current passport. If you have trouble doing this, you can enter the details from the documents instead.

It’s worth using your passport to create the account if you can. This means you’ll only need to show your passport when you enter the UK.

If you’re a refugee, you can’t use a passport from your home country. You can use a BRP card or a different passport.

If you want to use a BRP card, it must have expired in the last year.

If you want to use a current passport, you’ll also need a reference number. You’ll need either:

a BRP number - if your BRP was lost or stolen, you can still use the number if you know what it is

your Home Office reference number - this is sometimes called a ‘unique application number’ (UAN) or ‘global web form’ (GWF) number

You might find your reference number on letters or emails from the Home Office about your most recent visa application.


If you can’t find your reference number

If you’re an asylum seeker

If you don’t have a passport or BRP card that you can use
If you need help creating an account
You can ask someone you trust to help you set up the account - like a friend or family member. You’ll get an email with a link to your account.

The Home Office has arranged for some organisations to help people who might struggle to set up an account. It’s worth contacting them if for example:

you’re sick or disabled

you struggle with English

you’re homeless

Check which organisation can help you set up an account on GOV.UK.

If you can’t manage your own account, you can add someone to your account who can do it for you - known as a ‘proxy’. For example, you might need a proxy if you’re a child or you have a disability that means you can’t do it yourself. You can remove a proxy from your account at any time.

If you’re a proxy and you manage an account for a child, you can transfer control to them when they’re ready to manage the account. You’ll need to change the email address and phone number on the account.

If you still need help creating a UKVI account, talk to an adviser.

If you need help using a computer or mobile device
You can get help from the Home Office’s assisted digital service if you either:

aren’t confident using a mobile device or computer

don’t have access to a mobile device or computer

don’t have internet access

The service is provided by We Are Group.

They can help you over the phone. You might be able to visit someone or they might be able to visit you at home - this will depend on where you live. Find out how to get help from We Are Group on GOV.UK.

We Are Group

Tel: 0333 344 5675 (Monday to Friday from 9am to 6pm)

Text: 07537 416 944 - text the word VISA

Textphone (using Next Generation Text): 18001 0333 344 5675

Email: visa@we-are-digital.co.uk

Your call is likely to be free of charge if you have a phone deal that includes free calls to landlines - find out more about calling 030 numbers.

If you don't have internet access
You can use the internet free of charge at:

your local council - find your local council on GOV.UK

your local library - find your local library on GOV.UK

After you apply
If you can’t see your eVisa straight away, don’t worry - the Home Office will email you when it’s ready to view in your UKVI account. This usually takes 2 to 3 days - but it can take up to 8 weeks.

You can also use your BRP to get share codes to prove your right to work and your right to rent. You can do this for as long as you still have permission to stay in the UK.

You should keep your expired BRP after you get an eVisa. It might make it easier to apply for visas in the future.

Proving your rights in the UK
When you apply for a job, you’ll need to give a share code to your new employer - this will show you have the right to work. Get a share code for your employer on GOV.UK.

When you apply to rent a home, you’ll need to give a share code to your new landlord - this will show you have the right to rent. Get a share code for your landlord on GOV.UK.

You might need to give a share code to another organisation, for example a bank or building society when you set up an account. You might also want to give a share code to an adviser so they can check your immigration status. Get a general share code on GOV.UK.

You can still use your expired BRP to get a share code until the end of 2025 - as long as your visa is still valid.

Your share code code is only valid for 90 days - if it isn’t used within the 90 days you’ll need to get a new one.

Some organisations don’t need a share code because they’ll check your immigration status with the Home Office directly. You don’t need a share code to:

claim benefits

get hospital treatment

get help from your local council

Proving your right to enter the UK
To watch this video on our website, you need to accept video player cookies.

You can either:

accept video player cookies in your cookie settings
leave our website to watch 'How to Travel With Your eVisa'
It’s important to create your UKVI account before you travel.

If you have a passport you can use to travel, you should also make sure it’s linked to your eVisa before you book your journey.

If you’re a refugee, you can’t use a passport from your home country.

You can check your linked documents on your UKVI account. Sign into your UKVI account on GOV.UK.

When you book your journey or check in, you’ll have to give the details of your passport. The airline, ferry operator or Eurostar will check that your document is linked to an eVisa.

You might still need to show you have an eVisa if you have to change planes or ferries in another country during your journey. Make sure you can log into your UKVI account and show your eVisa. You might also want to print a screenshot of your eVisa to take with you.

This system is still very new. At the moment, it’s worth taking proof that you have an eVisa with you when you travel. For example, you can:

check you’ll be able to log into your UKVI account and show your eVisa during your journey

print a screenshot of your eVisa to take with you

take a share code with you - get a share code from GOV.UK

If you’re a refugee or you have humanitarian protection
You might not have a passport you can use to travel.

If you have another physical document that shows your right to enter the UK, you should give the details of this document when you check in. It isn’t connected to your eVisa, but the airline, ferry operator or Eurostar should still be able to check your status.

If you don’t have a physical document, you’ll need to give them a share code. Get a general share code on GOV.UK. You should also make sure you can log into your UKVI account and show them your eVisa. You might also want to print a screenshot of your eVisa to take with you - this might help if you struggle to log in.

Updating your UKVI account
Important
Make sure you keep your account up to date
If you don't keep your account details up to date, you might not be allowed to enter the UK.

You’ll need to update your UKVI account if:

you renew or replace the identity document you used to apply - for example, if your passport expires

you change your name - for example, if you get married 

you change your address, phone number or email address - your contact details need to be up to date so you can view or share your status

you want to change your identity document or add another one - this includes adding a second passport if you’re a citizen of 2 countries

If you’re updating your name, nationality or date of birth, you’ll need a document that proves the change - for example a passport. You’ll usually have to scan the document or take a photo and send it using the app.

If you used your BRP to create your UKVI account
You should add your passport to the account. You’ll need to show your passport when you enter the UK.

You can also add or change your identity document using your UKVI account.

To watch this video on our website, you need to accept video player cookies.

You can either:

accept video player cookies in your cookie settings
leave our website to watch 'How to update and add a new identity document'
It will be a number of weeks before you can log in with your new identity document details - make sure you keep the details of your old one until then. 

When you add a new identity document to your account, you’ll need to sign in using that identity document in the future.

Don’t worry if you can’t see your old identity document on your account. It’s still there, but the system might only show the most recent one you’ve added.

You can update your details in your UKVI account on GOV.UK.

If you don’t get confirmation after you've updated your account, or you’ve been waiting longer than 4 weeks, contact the UK Visas and Immigration contact centre.

If you have problems with your eVisa
If you need help setting up your UKVI account, you can ask the Home Office for help using webchat on GOV.UK.

If your details are wrong on your eVisa, or the Home Office used the wrong contact details when they set up your UKVI account, you can report an error with your eVisa on GOV.UK.

If you need help using the ‘UK Immigration: ID Check’ app, sharing your status or updating your details, contact the UK Visas and Immigration contact centre.

UK Visas and Immigration contact centre

Telephone: +44 (0)300 790 6268 - select option 3

Telephone: +44 (0)203 875 4669, if you are unable to dial 0300 numbers

Monday to Friday, 8am to 8.30pm

Saturday and Sunday, 9.30am to 4.30pm

Your call is likely to be free of charge if you have a phone deal that includes free calls to landlines - find out more about calling 030 numbers.
If you're from Ukraine and your visa is ending
This advice applies to England. See advice for See advice forNorthern Ireland, See advice forScotland, See advice forWales

Help us improve our website
Take 5 minutes to tell us if you found what you needed on our website. Your feedback will help us give millions of people the information they need.

There are a number of ways to stay in the UK.

If you have a visa under one of the Ukraine schemes
You’ll be able to apply to extend your stay in the UK by 18 months under the Ukraine Permission Extension (UPE) scheme. You’ll be able to apply if you have one of the following:

a visa under the ‘Homes for Ukraine’ scheme

a visa under the ‘Ukraine Family’ scheme

a visa under the ‘Ukraine Extension’ scheme

Your current visa must end in the next 28 days. If you apply before this, the government might reject your application - this means you'll need to apply again.

Your time in the UK on a visa under one of the Ukraine Schemes won’t count towards getting indefinite leave to remain.

You might also be able to stay in the UK by switching to a different visa - for example, a skilled worker visa or partner visa.

If you want to switch to a different visa, you'll first need to check if you're eligible for the visa. You'll also need to pay the visa fees when you apply. Check which visas you can apply for on GOV.UK.

If you have another type of visa
You should check if you can extend your current visa - this means your time in the UK might continue to count towards getting indefinite leave to remain.

If you can’t extend your visa, you should check if you can:

switch to a work or study visa

claim asylum - if there aren’t any other ways to stay in the UK

If you don’t have any documents you need for an application, explain why you don't have them when you apply. The Home Office should accept your application if there’s a good reason you don’t have the documents.

If your visa has already ended
You can:

apply for a UPE scheme visa - if you had a Visa under one of the Ukraine schemes

switch to a different visa

apply to extend your current visa - you can't extend your Ukraine Family Scheme or Ukraine Extension Scheme Visa as they are now closed to new applications

claim asylum

If you apply after your visa runs out, you will lose your rights to work, rent and receive benefits. You'll get these rights back when the Home Office gives you the new visa.

You can check when your current visa ends on your UK Visas and Immigration (UKVI) account on GOV.UK.

Apply to extend your current visa or switch to a different visa
If your visa expired in the last 14 days you can apply to extend your visa or apply for a different visa.

If it has been more than 14 days since your visa expired the Home Office might approve a visa application. You should get specialist advice on how this can affect your route to settlement.

You must explain why you’re applying after your visa has expired. The Home Office will only accept your application if you have a good reason.

You can’t extend your Ukraine Family Scheme or Ukraine Extension Scheme Visa as they are now closed to new applications.

Claim asylum
You can claim asylum at any time - it doesn’t matter if your visa ended more than 14 days ago.

Applying for a Ukraine Permission Extension (UPE) scheme visa
It’s free to apply for a UPE scheme visa.

You must be in the  UK when you apply to the UPE scheme and while your application is being reviewed. You should get a decision within 8 weeks. 

You can use your expired biometric residence permit (BRP) for the application. If you use your BRP, you might not need to go to a visa application centre to have your photograph and fingerprints taken again.

You can apply for a UPE scheme visa if you have permission under another Ukraine Scheme. This includes if you got the visa as a partner, child or parent of a Ukrainian citizen.

If you get a UPE scheme visa, you can stay in the UK for 18 months.

You can work, study and claim benefits while you’re in the UK. Getting an extension scheme visa won't help give you a right to live in the UK permanently.

If you’re aged under 18
You can apply if you’re a Ukrainian citizen. You can also apply if at least 1 of your parents is a Ukrainian citizen and you got permission to be in the UK as their child.

If your parent is applying to the scheme, they can apply for you too. If they’re not applying, they need to give you written permission to apply.

If you don’t have written permission, you’re allowed to apply if there’s a good reason you can’t get permission - for example, if no one can find your parents.

Check how to apply to the UPE scheme
You can apply to the UPE scheme on GOV.UK.

Switching to a work or study visa
The government have made it easier for you to switch your visa if you’re a Ukrainian citizen and you either:

were in the UK legally before 24 February 2022

applied to enter the UK before 24 February 2022

You can usually switch to a work or study visa if you qualify for the visa and pay the fees - even if you would normally have to leave the UK to apply. This is called a ‘concession’.

You can now switch to a work or study visa from most types of visa, including:

Visitor

Temporary Worker

Student or Short-term Student

Parent of a Child Student

Domestic Worker - any type

If your partner or child came to the UK as your dependant, they can also switch to a work or study visa.

Check how to apply
Important
You must ask the Home Office to apply the concession and explain why. Tell them you can’t go to Ukraine to apply for the visa because of the conflict.

You can ask for the concession on the application form or in a letter you send with the form.

If you don’t ask the Home Office to apply the concession they might refuse your application.

You can:

check the types of work visa and how to apply on GOV.UK

check the types of study visa and how to apply on GOV.UK

Claiming asylum
If you don’t have another way to stay in the UK, you can claim asylum. If you need to claim asylum, you can:

talk to an adviser

find out more about claiming asylum on GOV.UK

Help us improve our website
Take 5 minutes to tell us if you found what you needed on our website. Your feedback will help us give millions of people the information they need.

If your visa application is delayed
This advice applies to England. See advice for See advice forNorthern Ireland, See advice forScotland, See advice forWales

Help us improve our website
Take 5 minutes to tell us if you found what you needed on our website. Your feedback will help us give millions of people the information they need.

You might be able to find out why your immigration application is delayed by contacting the Home Office, or your local MP. You might want to make sure your passport will be returned in time for a holiday, or simply be worried about how long the decision is taking.

You can do this yourself rather than paying an expensive lawyer or immigration expert to do it for you.

Your immigration status
Your immigration status will stay the same while you wait for your new visa if you make the application in the 28 days before your visa ends.

If you already have the right to work, access education and receive benefits, you'll still have these rights while you wait for a new visa. You won’t keep these rights if you applied after your original visa ends - find out more about overstaying your visa.

Important
If your original visa had ended when you applied
You’ll usually lose the right to work, access education and receive benefits while you wait for a new visa.

The rules are complicated so you should get specialist immigration advice as soon as possible.

You can phone the UK Visas and Immigration contact centre (part of the Home Office) to find out how long your visa will take:

UK Visas and Immigration contact centre

Telephone: 0300 790 6268

Textphone: 0800 389 8289

Monday to Thursday, 9am to 4.45pm. Friday, 9am to 4.30pm.

Calls cost 12p per minute from a landline, 3p to 40p from a mobile.

If you’re outside the UK you need to use different contact details. Check how to contact UK Visas and Immigration from outside the UK on GOV.UK.

The service can be busy, so you may be waiting for some time.

You’ll be asked for a Home Office reference number - this is sometimes called a 'unique application number' (UAN). You’ll have received this number when you first applied.

Before you can get any information about your application, you’ll be asked questions to confirm your identity.

Contact your MP
It might be worth contacting your local MP if you've been waiting a long time to hear back from the Home Office. They can find out more about the delay and might be able to help speed up your visa application.

Prepare as much information as possible - it'll help your MP track down your application. For example, you might need:

important dates - like the date you submitted your application

any reference numbers you've received in letters or over the phone

Contact your nearest Citizens Advice if you need help.

Help us improve our website
Take 5 minutes to tell us if you found what you needed on our website. Your feedback will help us give millions of people the information they need.

If you've overstayed your visa or leave
This advice applies to England. See advice for See advice forNorthern Ireland, See advice forScotland, See advice forWales

Help us improve our website
Take 5 minutes to tell us if you found what you needed on our website. Your feedback will help us give millions of people the information they need.

If you’ve stayed longer than you're allowed to under your visa or leave, this is called overstaying. If you’re an overstayer and want to stay in the UK, you should check what you can do.

The Home Office won't remind you when your visa or leave expires. If you’re not sure when your leave expires, check your biometric residence permit, online immigration status or any stamp or sticker in your passport.

You might also be treated as an overstayer if you:

got your visa by fraud or you used false documents

didn’t mention something that could have led to your visa being refused, like having a criminal record

If you’ve applied to stay in the UK for longer
If you applied for a new visa before your old one expired, you can stay in the UK until you get a decision. If your application is valid you won’t be an overstayer.

The Home Office can refuse your application if you:

overstayed for longer than 14 days - even if you had a good reason

overstayed without a good reason

If you've applied to the EU Settlement Scheme
If you applied for pre-settled or settled status, you can usually stay in the UK until you get a decision.

If there was a reason you missed the deadline
You might still be able to apply for a new visa if you can prove you couldn’t renew your visa in time because of something you had no control over - like if you were in hospital. You’ll have to apply and give your reason within 14 days of the date your visa or leave expired.

It's best to get help proving you had a good reason for missing the deadline. Read more about finding an immigration specialist. Using a specialist might be quicker but you may have to pay. 

You won't be entitled to the same rights if you overstay even if you apply within 14 days of your leave expiring. For example if you were entitled to work before you overstayed, you won't be allowed to anymore.

Leaving the UK
If you don’t leave voluntarily within 30 days of your visa or leave expiring, you could be deported. Check what to do if you're going to be deported. 

If you leave after 30 days, you could be banned from re-entering the UK for between 1 and 10 years. How long you’re banned for depends on:

when you leave the UK

whether you leave voluntarily or you’re deported

whether you’re able to afford the cost of returning to your home country

You won’t be barred from re-entering if you’re applying for a partner or family visa or were under 18 when you overstayed. 

The overstaying might still be held against you on future visa applications. For example, if you’re applying for a visitor or student visa where you must show you’ll leave the UK at the end of your visit or studies.

Your rights as an overstayer
It doesn’t matter how long you’ve overstayed for - you can still:

send children to school until they turn 16

use emergency services in the UK (police, fire and ambulance)

You can also get essential and emergency healthcare, including treatment if you’re having a baby. 

You might be charged for some treatment after receiving it. Check when you might have to pay for your treatment.

Help us improve our website
Take 5 minutes to tell us if you found what you needed on our website. Your feedback will help us give millions of people the information they need.

Staying in the UK on a visa without your partner
This advice applies to England. See advice for See advice forNorthern Ireland, See advice forScotland, See advice forWales

Help us improve our website
Take 5 minutes to tell us if you found what you needed on our website. Your feedback will help us give millions of people the information they need.

If you're in the UK as a dependant on your partner's visa, your visa status could change when you separate or divorce. It's worth getting help from a specialist legal adviser who can advise you on your individual circumstances. You can:

search for an immigration adviser  on GOV.UK

contact your local Citizens Advice  for help finding someone in your area

You should go straight to a legal adviser if your partner is from the European Economic Area (EEA) and was living in the UK before 1 January 2021. There are special rules in this situation.

Otherwise, you’ll need to check your eligibility to stay in the UK and apply for a new visa if you can.

You and your partner both need to tell the Home Office that you’re separating or divorcing. Visa applications you make in the future could be affected if you don’t.

Settle in the UK by yourself
You can check if you’re eligible to settle in the UK (also known as getting ‘indefinite leave to remain’) on GOV.UK.

If you can settle in the UK yourself, then this is probably the best option to take. If you’re eligible, you’ll be able to stay in the UK independently from your partner.

If you have children in the UK
One option for staying in the UK is called the ‘parent route’ - you might be eligible if you have children who live in the UK. This is a common way for parents to be able to live in the UK after they’re separated or divorced.

There are various conditions that you’ll have to meet to be able to stay in the UK as a parent. If you want to know more about the detail, read the eligibility of parent routes and how to apply at GOV.UK.

A specialist legal adviser can help with your application.

Switch to a work visa if you’re employed
It might be possible to get a skilled work visa through your employer.

This can be a complex process but it’s a possible route to staying in the UK, especially if you work for a large organisation. The best thing to do is talk to your employer to see if they will sponsor you.

Read more about skilled worker visas at GOV.UK.

You'll have to remain in your job to keep this visa. It will also be 5 years before you can settle by yourself. So it’s best to check if you’re eligible to settle before you try to get a visa through your employer.

Other ways of staying
There are other ways of getting a visa if you’ve been living in the UK for a long time. These routes are called ‘private life in the UK’, for example if:

you’ve lived continuously in the UK for at least 20 years

you’re under 18 and have lived continuously in the UK for at least 7 years

you’re between 18 and 24, and have spent at least half your life living continuously in the UK

you’re over 18 and have no ties with the country that you’d have to return to - this means you need to have no social, cultural or family ties with that country

Any time you’ve spent in prison won’t count towards the above amounts.

This is complicated, so you should talk to a specialist immigration adviser about staying in the UK.

Read more about ‘private life in the UK’ visas at GOV.UK.

If you've experienced domestic abuse
You might be able to apply to stay in the UK or get back to the UK if you’re either:

in the UK on a partner visa

outside the UK and your last UK visa was a partner visa

Check if you can live permanently in the UK if your relationship has broken down because of domestic abuse.

Help us improve our website
Take 5 minutes to tell us if you found what you needed on our website. Your feedback will help us give millions of people the information they need.

Offering to let someone from Ukraine stay with you
This advice applies to England. See advice for See advice forNorthern Ireland, See advice forScotland, See advice forWales

Help us improve our website
Take 5 minutes to tell us if you found what you needed on our website. Your feedback will help us give millions of people the information they need.

You can volunteer for someone from Ukraine to come to the UK and live with you. This is called the ‘Homes for Ukraine’ scheme.

If you know who you want to host, they can apply to come to the UK. If you don’t know who you want to host, you can sign up to be matched with one or more people.

Your local council will give you a £350 'thank you payment' each month while you host someone. 

If you started hosting someone before 1 April 2025, the ‘thank you payment’ will go up to £500 each month after a year, until the end of the second year.

If you started hosting someone on or after 1 April 2025, this payment will stay at £350.

If you want to bring your family members to the UK
Your family members can no longer apply for a Ukraine family visa. You can still bring your family members to the UK under the ‘Homes for Ukraine’ scheme if you or a host:

is a British citizen

is an Irish citizen - you must be living or have lived in the UK

has indefinite leave to remain

has settled status from the EU Settlement Scheme

If you’re a parent or legal guardian in the UK under any Ukraine Scheme, you can apply to host your child.

If your family members get a visa under the Homes for Ukraine scheme, they can stay in the UK for 18 months.

Check if you can apply to the scheme
You must have space for someone to live with you. It can be a spare room or an empty property.

The space you’re offering must be safe, suitable and large enough for the number of people you want to live there. It must have smoke alarms and it must have had a gas safety check in the last year. If you’re not sure if the space is big enough, check your local council’s rules about overcrowding.

You can find your local council on GOV.UK.

If you’re in the UK on a visa, you must have the right to live in the UK for at least another 6 months.

Safety checks will be carried out on you, your guests and other adults in your home, including:

police and criminal record checks

Disclosure and Barring Service (DBS) checks

The council will also visit you before your guest arrives to check the space you’re offering is suitable.

Check if you’re allowed to have someone stay with you
Before you apply to the scheme, get permission from your landlord or mortgage provider, if you have one.

If they’re happy for you to apply to the scheme, ask them to confirm this in writing. This means you can prove it later if you have to.

Check who you can apply to host
If you know who you want to host, you’ll need to check you’re allowed to host them. You can only host them if they’re one of the following:

a Ukrainian citizen

the partner of a Ukrainian citizen - this means their husband, wife, fiancé(e), civil partner, proposed civil partner, or a partner they’ve lived with for at least 2 years

the child aged under 18 of a Ukrainian citizen

the parent of a Ukrainian citizen who you’re also planning to host

You can sponsor them if they were living in Ukraine by 31 December 2021 - or they’re a child born after 31 December 2021.

It’s worth them applying even if they weren’t living in Ukraine by 31 December 2021 - the Home Office will consider their application.

Hosting a child without their parent or guardian
There are extra rules if you want to host a child aged under 18 who isn’t with their parent or guardian. You must:

be able to show you knew the child’s parent or guardian before 24 February 2022

agree to look after them for 3 years or until they reach 18 years old

pass safeguarding checks

Check the full rules about hosting a child without their parent or guardian on GOV.UK.

Check if hosting will affect your finances
You must be willing to let someone live with you for at least 6 months - the longer the better.

You can’t charge your guests rent. The government will give you a £350 thank you payment each month - it doesn’t matter how many people you’re hosting. If you host people in different properties, you’ll get a thank you payment for each property.

If your guest has a visa from one of the Ukraine schemes, they can apply to the Ukraine Permission Extension (UPE) scheme. This lets them extend their stay in the UK by 18 months. 

You’ll get thank you payments for 18 months after your guest moves onto the UPE scheme. You can read more about the UPE Scheme.

The government say you will not have to pay tax on the thank you payment and it will not count as income when calculating your benefits.

The government has said hosting people will not affect your benefits. For example, this means it will not stop you being affected by the ‘bedroom tax’.

Hosting people also will not affect any council tax discounts you get - for example a single person discount.

If you host people in a separate property which has an empty homes premium, you won’t have to pay the premium while they’re there and the council tax should be reduced.

If you get Council Tax Reduction, ask your local council if hosting people will affect it. You can find your local council on GOV.UK.

Hosting people in your home will not affect your home insurance for the first 12 months. You should check with your insurance provider if:

you want your guest to stay in a separate property like a second home

you want to know if the insurance will cover your guests’ possessions

Check what hosting involves
You must be willing to let someone live with you for at least 6 months - the longer the better.

It’s worth knowing that your guests might:

not speak English fluently or at all

have been separated from their family members

have trauma because of what’s happening in their country

Your guests might also be disabled or have extra needs. You should be told about any extra needs before you commit to hosting them.

Check what you can do for your guests
The government say you should do the following for your guests:

give them somewhere to stay

meet them when they arrive in the UK - you’ll need to contact them to arrange this before they travel

help them sign up to local services like a GP and dentist

You might also want to do other things like make them meals, in particular when they first arrive.

Your guests will probably want access to the internet. This will let them check the news, contact their friends and family and meet other people from Ukraine in your local area.

Check what support your guests can get
Your guests will have the right to:

work or study

claim benefits

use the NHS

go to school

rent or buy somewhere to live

go to free English language classes

It might take some time for your guests to start getting benefits and for GPs to agree to register them.

You can find more information about what your guests can do in the UK on GOV.UK.

It’s worth checking what support there is in your local area, for example:

Ukrainian community groups

interpreter services

mental health and trauma support groups

support from your local council

Your local council should check on your guests after they arrive and help them get the support they need.

Your guests will also be able to contact the Ukraine Support Helpline, which is run by Barnardo’s. They can give advice and support and help your guests access therapy services.

Ukraine Support Helpline

Phone: 0800 148 8586

Monday to Friday, 10am to 8pm

Saturday, 10am to 3pm

Calls are free from mobiles and landlines.

Email: ukrainiansupport@barnardos.org.uk

Contact form: https://www.barnardos.org.uk/what-we-do/helping-families/ukrainian-helpline

If you need to stop hosting your guests
You can decide at any time that you can’t keep hosting your guests under the Homes for Ukraine scheme. You’ll need to tell your local council so the council don’t keep paying you the thank you payment.

If you need your guests to leave before 6 months, you should give them at least 2 months’ notice - the council should help them find a new host.

If your guests have enough money, they might be able to afford to move into rented housing after living with you.

If you and your guests agree, they can start renting a room or rooms from you. The government’s ‘Rent a Room scheme’ means you can get up to £7,500 in rent each year without having to pay tax on it. Check how the Rent a Room scheme works on GOV.UK.

If you can’t keep hosting your guests and they can’t find anywhere else to live, they can apply for help as homeless. They will have the same right to apply as British citizens. 

Check the rules about applying for help as homeless.

Check how to apply
If you don’t already know who you want to host, you can sign up to be matched with someone on GOV.UK.

If you know who you want to host, they should apply online to come to the UK on GOV.UK. You’ll need to give them details like your name, address and passport number.

You can also apply for them - you’ll need to get their permission. Try to be in contact with them while you apply so you can get all the details you need.

What they need to do depends on whether they have a Ukrainian international passport with them. It doesn’t matter if their passport has expired as long as it has an extension stamp.

If there are children who have been added to a parent’s passport, the children will need to follow the rules for people without a passport.


If the people you want to host have Ukrainian passports with them

If the people you want to host don’t have Ukrainian passports with them
Check what will happen when your guests arrive in the UK
If possible, your guests should arrive in the UK at a ‘welcome point’. Most of the UK’s major ports and airports are welcome points. You can find the list of welcome points on GOV.UK.

Someone from the government should meet your guests when they arrive at a welcome point and show them where to wait until you arrive. They will give your guests £200 each to help pay for things at first.

You’ll need to help your guests get from where they arrive in the UK to where they’re going to stay.

If your guests have Ukrainian international passports, they’ll be allowed to travel for free on buses and trains for 48 hours after they arrive in the UK. Find out more about free travel for Ukrainian citizens on the National Rail website.

Help us improve our website
Take 5 minutes to tell us if you found what you needed on our website. Your feedback will help us give millions of people the information they need.

After you get refugee status
This advice applies to England. See advice for See advice forNorthern Ireland, See advice forScotland, See advice forWales

Help us improve our website
Take 5 minutes to tell us if you found what you needed on our website. Your feedback will help us give millions of people the information they need.

If you’ve claimed asylum and you get refugee status, the Home Office will create a UK Visas and Immigration (UKVI) account. This will give you online evidence of your immigration status - also called an ‘eVisa’.

The Home Office will send you a UKVI customer number and instructions on how to use it to access your account and eVisa.

If you have a biometric residence permit (BRP) it’s no longer valid - your eVisa has replaced it. You’ll need to use your UKVI account to prove your immigration status instead. You can get help setting up an online status.

You can use your eVisa to confirm your:

identity

right to study

right to any public services or benefits that you're entitled to

Check when asylum support stops
Asylum support and 'section 4' support will stop either 28 or 56 days after you’re granted permission to stay.

If you’re single and you don’t have children, support stops after 28 days. 

Support usually stops after 56 days if:

you’re married

you have children

you’re pregnant 

you’re over the age of 65

you’re disabled

You'll get a letter confirming when asylum support will stop.

If your eVisa has any of your personal details wrong, you can report an eVisa error on GOV.UK.

This means you’ll:

stop getting your cash allowance

have to move house - if you’ve been given somewhere to live as an asylum seeker

Once you’ve got refugee status, you’ll get permission to work in the UK - in any profession and at any skill level. If you’re not ready or able to look for work and have very little or no income, you can apply for benefits instead.

You’ll also have to think about opening a bank account and getting a National Insurance number.

When you get migrant status, the Home Office will tell Migrant Help. Migrant Help is an organisation that can help you find housing, claim benefits and make an appointment at the Jobcentre. They’ll contact you within 1 working day of being told about your migrant status.

If you need extra support
Contact your local Citizens Advice  for help with benefits and housing, and to get details of local charities, English language schools and community groups.

Find a new home
If you’ve been living somewhere as part of getting asylum support, your decision letter will tell you when you have to move.

If you’re single and you don’t have children, you’ll have to move within 28 days of the date on your decision letter.

You’ll usually have to move within 56 days of the date on your decision letter if:

you’re married

you have children

you’re pregnant

you’re over the age of 65

you’re disabled

Your accommodation provider should send you a letter giving you at least 7 days’ notice of when you have to move out.

If you don’t get at least 7 days’ notice, Migrant Help can ask the Home Office to let you stay in your accommodation for longer.

You can contact Migrant Help by either:

sending an email to positivemoveon@migranthelpuk.org

calling the free asylum helpline on 0808 8010 503

If you already live with friends or family
You don’t need to move. If your friends or family are claiming benefits to help them pay rent, it might mean they get less.

If you need help getting housing
Contact your local council or housing office as soon as you can. The Home Office don’t provide accommodation to refugees, but your local council will be able to talk you through your options.

Whether you can stay in the same area depends on things like:

how long you’ve lived there

if you have family in the area

if you’re at risk of becoming homeless

It’s worth knowing there are long waiting lists for accommodation - you might be put in a bed and breakfast (B&B) or hostel temporarily.

Getting help if you’re homeless
If you’re worried about becoming homeless, you can call the homeless charity Shelter on 0808 800 4444.

Shelter also has advice for refugees on getting help if you’re homeless.

You can also search online through Homeless Link to find emergency accommodation yourself.

If you need help paying a tenancy deposit, you can search for help to rent schemes through the housing charity Crisis.

Working
If you’re ready to look for work, you can search online.

If you’re in London, the Refugee Council’s employment advice and support service have a course that will help you if you’re not quite sure where to start.

If you have qualifications from your home country, to find a similar job here, you'll need to find their UK equivalent. Check your qualifications on the Ecctis website. A fee is charged for this service.

When you’re offered a job, you’ll need to prove your right to work in the UK. Check how to prove your right to work.

Claiming benefits
You might be entitled to benefits in the UK even though you’ll stop getting Asylum Support.

You might be entitled to benefits like:

Universal Credit - if you’re unemployed, too ill to work or on a low wage

Pension Credit - if you’ve reached State Pension age

Housing Benefit - if you need help to pay rent and you’ve reached State Pension age or you’re in temporary or supported housing

a refugee integration loan - to help pay for a rent deposit, household items, education and training for work

If you claimed asylum before 1 April 2019, you might be able to apply for tax credit payments you missed while waiting for your asylum decision. Check if you can apply for backdated tax credits payments on GOV.UK.

You can check if you’ve reached State Pension age on GOV.UK.

You’ll need a National Insurance number to claim benefits - you’ll have applied for one at your interview with the Home Office when you first claimed asylum. You’ll also need it to pay tax and register with a doctor.

You can check what benefits you can get using a benefits calculator.

Get a National Insurance number
Normally, you’ll get your National Insurance (NI) number through the post just after you get refugee status.

If you haven’t received a NI number, call the National Insurance number application line. Ask whether they’ve issued you with a NI number - if they haven’t, ask what you need to do to get one.

Opening a bank account
Now that you have an immigration status, you’re allowed to open a UK bank account. It makes things like paying for food and bills much easier.

It should be an easy process if you have proof of your immigration status. You can show them your decision letter or give them a share code if you have an online immigration status. The bank can also check with the Home Office to confirm you have permission to stay in the UK.

You can view your immigration status and get a share code on GOV.UK.

Travelling outside the UK
If you don’t have a passport, you can apply for a travel document. This lets you leave and return to the UK.

You can apply for a travel document on GOV.UK.

Get more help
You can find a guide for new refugees on GOV.UK.

It includes guidance on things like:

employment and benefits

housing and services

education

healthcare

Help us improve our website
Take 5 minutes to tell us if you found what you needed on our website. Your feedback will help us give millions of people the information they need.

Prepare for an asylum interview
This advice applies to England. See advice for See advice forNorthern Ireland, See advice forScotland, See advice forWales

Help us improve our website
Take 5 minutes to tell us if you found what you needed on our website. Your feedback will help us give millions of people the information they need.

After you apply for asylum, you’ll have to do one of the following:

go to an asylum interview

fill in a questionnaire

fill in a questionnaire and then go to an asylum interview

It’s really important that you get advice from an immigration specialist. Your case is more likely to be successful if the evidence you have is prepared properly - it’s hard to do this on your own.

As an asylum seeker, you might be entitled to legal aid (depending on your savings and income). If you get legal aid, you won’t have to pay for legal advice. If you’re eligible, don’t let anyone charge you - you’ll spend money for no reason.

If you get a questionnaire
You should ask your legal adviser to help you with your questionnaire. You’ll need to return the questionnaire by the deadline on your letter. You can ask for more time if you need longer to complete the questionnaire or to find legal advice.

It’s a chance for you to tell the Home Office more about your background.

The questionnaire will include questions about:

why you’re afraid of returning to your home country

what happened to you and when

how you entered the UK

which countries you passed through to get to the UK

Your letter should tell you whether you need to fill in the questionnaire instead of going to an interview or before you go to your interview.

If you’ve been invited to an asylum interview
Your asylum interview (or ‘substantive interview’) is an important step in your application for refugee status - it’s a chance for you to put your case across to someone from the Home Office. They’ll make a decision based on what you say.

Your application will usually be rejected if you don’t go to your interview.

Your interview will happen after your ‘screening’ - it could be anything from a week to a year or even later. The Home Office will send you a letter telling you when your interview will be. 

Before the interview
If you’ve not been sent a questionnaire, it might be a good idea to send a written statement to support your claim before your interview - you should ask your legal adviser for help with this.

You should ask for the interview to be recorded. You must do this at least 24 hours before the interview.

It’s a good idea, just in case:

an interpreter makes a mistake

you’re not sure if you mentioned something

Your interview letter will tell you how to do this, or you can contact your local Citizens Advice if you need help.

You can also ask for a male or female interviewer (and interpreter, if you need one) - do whatever makes you feel more comfortable.

Planning travel
You’ll have to travel to your interview - they usually take place in big cities like Belfast, London, Leeds and Liverpool.

If you’re receiving Asylum Support, you should be sent a travel ticket. It might not arrive until the day before your interview. If it doesn’t arrive, call the number on your interview letter.

Who to take with you
Your letter will say who you need to take with you. You don’t need to take your children to the interview - even if you’re applying on their behalf. They might be distracting for your interviewer.

Try finding a friend to look after your children - if you can’t find anyone, call the number on your interview letter. They’ll either:

find a new date when you can find childcare

find childcare for you that’s close to the interview

You can’t take a friend or family member to the interview. It’ll normally be you, the interviewer and the Home Office interpreter if you need one. You can take a lawyer and their interpreter. This won’t be covered by legal aid unless you’re:

a child

a vulnerable person - for example, if you’re disabled or seriously ill

What to take with you
Your interview can’t go ahead if you don’t take all of these with you (or whichever documents you have):

your application registration card (ARC)

your passport or travel document

a birth certificate

evidence of where you’re living - for example a utility bill

At the interview
The interview is your chance to talk about everything that’s led to you applying for asylum. It’s likely to be emotional for you, but it’s important that you’re honest throughout.

The Home Office could use it against you if you say something in your questionnaire or interview that’s different from your screening interview. If you said something wrong at your screening interview, you should explain why to your interviewer. 

There’s no set time for how long the interview can take - it could last a few hours.

If you sent in a questionnaire or written statement beforehand, the questions will be based around the information you gave. You should also expect the interviewer to ask questions about:

why you’ve left your home country

why your home country is dangerous for you

how you got to the UK

when you got the UK

why you didn’t claim asylum in a safe country - if you passed through one to get to the UK

why you entered the UK illegally - if you entered illegally

If you don’t know how to answer a question
It’s fine to tell the interviewer that you don’t know the answer to a question - it’s better to say “I don’t know” rather than guess. Or if there’s something you’re not comfortable answering, you can say you don’t want to answer.

Ask for a break if you need one - the interviewer should understand.

After the interview
You have 5 days after the interview to send in a statement (or ‘make representations’) - you can mention anything you didn’t talk about during the interview. You’ll be told how to do this after the interview.

To make your statement, take the following steps:

Listen back to the recording of the interview, if you have one.

Check that nothing was misinterpreted - for example, by an interpreter.

Think about everything that you wanted to mention on the day - and make sure you covered anything that would help your case.

Include anything you missed out in the statement.

You’ll be told where to send the statement on the day of the interview.

What happens next
You’ll get a letter in the post from the Home Office. If you don’t hear 30 days after your interview, you’re unlikely to hear for another 6 months (or more) - even though the Home Office will tell you they have a target of 30 days. If you didn’t have to go to an interview, you should hear within 6 months.

If you have a specialist (or lawyer), they should be writing to the Home Office every 3 months. Ask them to contact the Home Office regularly if they’re not doing this already.

You’re entitled to Asylum Support until you get your decision. Asylum Support means you will get housing and money to support you. You won’t be deported while you’re still waiting for your decision. You can find out more about the interview and asylum process on the Right to Remain website.

Help us improve our website
Take 5 minutes to tell us if you found what you needed on our website. Your feedback will help us give millions of people the information they need.

Report human trafficking
This advice applies to England. See advice for See advice forNorthern Ireland, See advice forScotland, See advice forWales

Help us improve our website
Take 5 minutes to tell us if you found what you needed on our website. Your feedback will help us give millions of people the information they need.

Human trafficking is the trade of people for exploitation and commercial gain.

If you think someone has been trafficked, you can help make them safe.

How to report human trafficking
If you suspect human trafficking, call the police. Call 999 if it’s an emergency, or 101 if it’s not urgent.

If you’d prefer to stay anonymous, call Crimestoppers on 0800 555 111.

If you don’t want to call the police, you can talk to a charity anonymously.

Identify human trafficking
Human trafficking doesn’t just happen in the sex industry. People are exploited in construction, farming and even working in other people’s homes.

Usually people who've been trafficked are:

lied to about what a job involves

brought from another country (but people can also be trafficked within the UK) 

forced to work 

monitored very closely by whoever they work for

Because people are trafficked to work for very little pay or none at all, it’s sometimes called modern-day slavery or labour exploitation.

Signs of human trafficking
All trafficking cases are different, but there are common signs. A victim of trafficking might:

have a lack of freedom

work for very little or no pay

seem to be in debt to someone

live in fear of someone or even the authorities

have signs of physical abuse, like cuts and bruises

move location regularly

Children can be trafficked too. They will share many common signs with adult victims but might stand out from other children because:

they have money or possessions they can’t account for

they don’t seem to live with parents or guardians 

they’re emotionally unstable, for example, aggressive, withdrawn or anxious

You can find out more about spotting the potential signs of human trafficking on the Modern Slavery Helpline’s website.

Get advice
If you want confidential advice about trafficking before calling the police, there are a number of specialist organisations you can talk to. You can contact:

Salvation Army's 24 hour confidential helpline for reporting modern slavery on 0800 818 3733 

Modern Day Slavery Foundation's helpline on 0800 0121 700, open 24 hours a day

NSPCC's helpline on 0808 800 5000 if you think a child is in danger of trafficking

If you need help to decide what to do next, contact your local Citizens Advice.

What happens after you report trafficking
The first thing the police will do is protect someone who has been trafficked from anyone that might harm them.

The police and specialist organisations will work together to provide the victim with practical and emotional support. They’ll get medical care and help arranging accommodation in safe place, away from their traffickers.

If it’s safe, they’ll be helped to return to their home country. If it’s not safe to return, perhaps because they might be trafficked again, they'll get help to stay in the UK permanently. They might be able to get free legal help (called legal aid) for this.

Help us improve our website
Take 5 minutes to tell us if you found what you needed on our website. Your feedback will help us give millions of people the information they need.What to do if you've been trafficked
This advice applies to England. See advice for See advice forNorthern Ireland, See advice forScotland, See advice forWales

Help us improve our website
Take 5 minutes to tell us if you found what you needed on our website. Your feedback will help us give millions of people the information they need.

If you’ve been forced to work for little or no pay in a job you can’t leave, you might be a victim of human trafficking.

Human trafficking is also known as modern slavery or exploitation.

You can be trafficked to do lots of things, eg to work in people’s homes, in manual jobs such as construction and farming, or into prostitution.

If you think you’re a victim of human trafficking
Call the police by dialling 999.

You haven’t done anything wrong. It’s important to know that:

the police will help you

you’ll be protected from anyone you think might hurt you

you don’t have to give evidence in court unless you choose to

How to tell if you’ve been trafficked
While every case of trafficking is different, there are signs you can look out for if something doesn’t feel right about your situation.

Promise of a better life
You can be trafficked by someone you’ve met in person or online.

They might have:

brought you to work from another country, though you can be trafficked within the UK

promised you a good job or a relationship

Being forced to work
You might have been trafficked if you’ve been:

forced to work very long hours

paid very little, or nothing at all

forced to have sex with people

Having your freedom taken away
Your traffickers might have stopped you leaving by:

taking away your passport

claiming you owe them money, perhaps for travel or accommodation 

accompanying you wherever you go

threatening to hurt you

You can be trafficked by people you trust
Joy came to the UK when she was twelve to help her aunt and go to school. Instead of going to school, she had to work long hours in the house. At 15, Joy was sent to work for her aunt’s friend, who would slap her when she did something wrong. The friend's husband would sometimes abuse her. Joy couldn’t find her passport, but eventually left the house and found support through a charity.

Source: Rights of Women, May 2014

After you call the police
The police will take you somewhere safe, away from your trafficker.

If you’re a victim of trafficking you’ll have at least 4 weeks to recover without needing to arrange a visa to stay in the UK. During this time you’ll get help finding somewhere to live. You’ll also get emotional support such as counselling if you need it. You won’t have to pay for any of this help.

The police will investigate the people who trafficked you. You’ll get support and protection if you want to give evidence against them in court.

You’ll get help to return home if it’s safe for you to go back. If returning would put you at risk of being trafficked again, you’ll get help applying to stay in the UK permanently. You might be able to get free legal help (called legal aid) for this.

If you have to go to court or need more time to recover, you’ll get help to apply for temporary permission to stay in the UK. You can get benefits and help with housing if you get permission to stay.

Check what other help you can get on GOV.UK.

If you don’t want to talk to the police
It’s ok if you don’t want to speak to the police - you can contact a charity who help victims of trafficking.

Call The Salvation Army’s confidential helpline for victims of human trafficking on 0800 808 3733. The helpline is open 24 hours a day.

You’ll get help leaving your situation when you’re ready, and building a life afterwards.

If you want to talk to someone in person, go to your local Citizens Advice. They’ll give you advice on what to do next, and put you in touch with expert support in your area.

Help us improve our website
Take 5 minutes to tell us if you found what you needed on our website. Your feedback will help us give millions of people the information they need.

Your options if you're in the UK illegally
This advice applies to England. See advice for See advice forNorthern Ireland, See advice forScotland, See advice forWales

Help us improve our website
Take 5 minutes to tell us if you found what you needed on our website. Your feedback will help us give millions of people the information they need.

If you're living illegally in the UK, you might be able to apply to make your stay legal. You’ll be living here illegally if you came to the UK without permission or your permission to stay has expired. 

You can also get help returning to your home country if you want to.

If you can’t live in the UK legally but choose to remain here, life could be difficult. You can be charged for some NHS treatment or be detained and removed from the country. You might be exploited at work, struggle to find housing. 

Get immigration advice
There are ways to make your stay legal. An immigration specialist will decide which applies to you. Don't worry, getting advice will be confidential - they won't tell anybody about your query. Talk to an adviser for help finding an immigration specialist in your area. 

You can also call the Joint Council for the Welfare of Immigrants for help. They provide free and confidential advice to people living in the UK illegally. 

Joint Council for the Welfare of Immigrants

Telephone: 0800 160 1004

Monday, Tuesday and Thursday, 10am to midday

Calls to the Joint Council for the Welfare of Immigrants are free.

www.jcwi.org.uk

How to become a legal resident in the UK
Whether you can live in the UK legally will depend on your circumstances. Your application will probably be refused if you apply more than 14 days after your permission to stay has expired. If you’re not sure when your leave expires, check your biometric residence permit, online immigration status or passport.

You might be able to apply to stay in the UK if:

it would be very difficult for you to live in the country you would be in - for example because of a lack of work, education, family or friends, or if you wouldn't be accepted back there

you’ve lived in the UK for 20 years or more

you're aged 18 to 25 and you've lived in the UK for at least half your life

you can’t return to the country because you’d be persecuted or seriously harmed - for example, if you’d be tortured

you’ve got a partner who has a right to stay in the UK - for example, if your partner is British or has settled status

you’ve got children in the UK, especially if they're British citizens, settled or have been in the UK for 7 years or more

your last visa was as a partner and you've suffered domestic abuse at the hands of the partner related to your visa

If you’ve got children living in the UK illegally, it’s important to get advice on whether you can make an application for them. They’ll be living illegally if they haven’t been registered for British citizenship or leave to remain. You can read more about what you can do if your child is here illegally. 

If you can't stay in the UK legally
You might be able to get help from the government to arrange and pay for your journey back to your home country. This is known as making a 'voluntary return'. You can contact the Voluntary Returns Service team to find out what help you can get. You can read more about voluntary returns on GOV.UK.

Voluntary Departures and Assisted Voluntary Returns

Telephone: 0300 790 6268

Monday to Friday, 9am to 5.30pm

Calls cost up to 12p per minute from landlines, 3p to 45p from mobiles

You can also apply online for help to leave the country.

If you’ve been in prison
If your prison sentence was up to 4 years, you might be able to get help to return to your home country using the Home Office’s ‘Facilitated Returns Scheme’.

You can apply to the scheme:

up to 9 months before your sentence ends

when your sentence has ended

You can’t use this scheme if you’re a citizen of the EU, EEA or Switzerland. You can check which countries are in the EU and EEA on GOV.UK.

If you’ve already applied to stay in the UK, you must cancel your application before you apply to the scheme. If you’re not sure what your best option is, talk to an adviser.

What help you can get
The Facilitated Returns Scheme can give you money to help you settle down when you return home. You can use the money to do things like:

set up a business

study or get training

pay for housing

pay for your medical costs

If you’re using a prisoner transfer scheme to serve the rest of your sentence in your home country, you can still apply for the scheme.

How to apply
To check if you can apply for the Facilitated Returns Scheme, call 020 8760 8513 from Monday to Friday, 9am to 5pm.


Help us improve our website
Take 5 minutes to tell us if you found what you needed on our website. Your feedback will help us give millions of people the information they need.
If your child is living in the UK illegally
This advice applies to England. See advice for See advice forNorthern Ireland, See advice forScotland, See advice forWales

Help us improve our website
Take 5 minutes to tell us if you found what you needed on our website. Your feedback will help us give millions of people the information they need.

Your child will be living in the UK illegally if they came without a visa or they’ve stayed longer than their visa said they could. This is called ‘overstaying’. 

If your child is here illegally, you should apply for them to live in the country legally before they’re 18. It’s a good idea because:

the application process will be easier if they’re under 18

they can continue with their education beyond 16

they'll be able to work or claim benefits when they're old enough

If you're also here illegally, you can apply at the same time as your child. If your child's application is successful, you might be able to stay.

If you're here legally, but your child isn't, you should get help from a specialist immigration adviser. 

Get specialist help
You’ll always need the help of a specialist immigration adviser to register a child who’s living here illegally - the application is a complicated process. You can read more about finding a specialist immigration adviser.

Important
If you need extra support
A specialist immigration adviser will tell you the best way to legalise your child's immigration status - don't worry, it'll be completely confidential.

They'll also be able to give you advice on your own immigration status if you're in the UK illegally. 

If your child was born outside the UK
You can apply for your child to get 'leave on the ground of private life' in the UK if both of the following apply:

they're under 18 years old

they have lived in the UK for at least 7 years in a row

You can read more about applying for leave on the grounds of private life on GOV.UK.

If your child was born in the UK
If your child was born in the UK, there are different ways to get them a legal immigration status. You can:

register them as a British citizen

apply for ‘leave on the grounds of their private life' in the UK

apply for the same leave as you or their other parent - if their parents have different lengths of leave, you can apply for the longer amount of leave for your child

Register your child as a British citizen
You can register your child as a British citizen after they’ve lived in the UK for 10 years. You can read more about how to register your child as a British citizen on GOV.UK. You should get specialist help to do this - read more about finding an immigration specialist.

Registering your child as a British citizen is the best option, because they:

will be able to work legally

they can continue with their education after 16

can get NHS healthcare

will be eligible for benefits

Apply for leave on the grounds of private life in the UK
You can apply for indefinite leave for your child if they were born in the UK and have been living here for at least 7 years in a row.

You’ll need to pay a fee to apply for indefinite leave - check the cost of ‘Indefinite leave to remain - main applicants and dependants’ on GOV.UK.

If your child wasn’t born in the UK or you can’t afford the fees for indefinite leave, you might be able to apply for limited leave instead. This means you’ll have to renew the leave every 2 and a half years.

The application for limited leave is more likely to succeed if there are specific reasons why your child shouldn’t leave the UK - for example, they’re receiving medical treatment here or they need to continue their education here.

The application might be granted with a condition that they can’t get benefits when they turn 18. When you apply, you can ask the Home Office not to put it in. If they do, you can apply for them to remove it later.

When you apply for limited leave or apply to renew it, you’ll have to pay:

the cost of the visa - check the cost of a ‘Leave to remain - Other’ visa on GOV.UK

an ‘immigration health surcharge’ - check the amount of the immigration health surcharge on GOV.UK

If you can’t afford the fees, you might be able to apply for a fee waiver - check if you can get a fee waiver on GOV.UK.

You can read more about applying for leave on the grounds of private life on GOV.UK.

Help us improve our website
Take 5 minutes to tell us if you found what you needed on our website. Your feedback will help us give millions of people the information they need.
Proving your right to live in the UK with the Windrush scheme
This advice applies to England. See advice for See advice forNorthern Ireland, See advice forScotland, See advice forWales

Help us improve our website
Take 5 minutes to tell us if you found what you needed on our website. Your feedback will help us give millions of people the information they need.

If the UK has been your home for a long time but you don't have an immigration document to prove it, you could get a document from the Windrush scheme.

You can claim Windrush compensation for problems you had because you didn’t have a document - for example, when you had to show your right to work or claim benefits.

Before you claim compensation, you need an immigration document that proves your right to live in the UK permanently. If you don’t have a document, apply to the Windrush scheme for an immigration document first.

Getting an immigration document from the Windrush scheme
It’s free to apply to the Windrush scheme. If you’re eligible, you’ll get a document that proves your right to live and work in the UK permanently.

You could be eligible if:

you or your parents arrived in the UK from a Commonwealth country before 1973 - check countries in the Commonwealth on GOV.UK 

you arrived in the UK from any country before 1989

If you or your parents are Commonwealth citizens who arrived before 1973, you might also be eligible for British citizenship from the Windrush scheme.

If you think you’re eligible for the Windrush scheme, the first thing you should do is contact your nearest Citizens Advice and arrange to speak to an adviser.

They can help you work out if you can apply. 

Some Citizens Advice advisers can give immigration advice, but it depends where you live. If your nearest Citizens Advice can't give immigration advice, they might be able to help you find a local solicitor who can.

You can also check your eligibility and how to apply on GOV.UK.

Claiming Windrush compensation
You could claim compensation if you had problems because you couldn’t prove your right to live in the UK - for example, when you had to show your right to work, rent or claim benefits.

You could also claim compensation if the government decided to take action against you - like deporting you or saying you had to leave the country.

If you don’t have an immigration document that proves your right to live in the UK permanently, apply to the Windrush scheme for a document before you claim compensation.

You can check if you can claim compensation on the GOV.UK website.

Before you see an adviser
Start getting together documents you have that prove how long you’ve been in the UK - for example proof of where you’ve lived, studied and worked. Look for any:

current and previous passports

letters from the Home Office

birth and marriage certificates for you and any children born in the UK

school reports and exam certificates

bills and letters

employment records - for example old payslips or P45 forms

The older the documents, the better. Take these along to your appointment and show them to your adviser - they’ll help you work out what to do next.

Help us improve our website
Take 5 minutes to tell us if you found what you needed on our website. Your feedback will help us give millions of people the information they need.

Get specialist immigration advice
This advice applies to England. See advice for See advice forNorthern Ireland, See advice forScotland, See advice forWales

Help us improve our website
Take 5 minutes to tell us if you found what you needed on our website. Your feedback will help us give millions of people the information they need.

Changes to immigration rules
On 12 May 2025, the government announced plans to change immigration rules.

The changes might affect how long you have to wait to get indefinite leave to remain and British citizenship. The government haven’t said when these rules will change.

You can check how the changes to immigration rules might affect you.

If you need help with an immigration problem, you can contact your nearest Citizens Advice for free and confidential advice.

They might be able to help you with issues like:

applying to the EU Settlement Scheme

problems with coming to the UK or staying in the UK - for example, applying for entry clearance, leave to enter, leave to remain or residence permits

becoming a British citizen - also known as ‘naturalisation’

your right to work, claim benefits and use public services in the UK

getting replacement immigration documents

If your problem is complicated
Your local Citizens Advice can help you if they have a specialist immigration adviser. If they can't help you, you can:

ask them to direct you to another organisation or a solicitor

search for an immigration adviser near you

Immigration specialists must be registered with the Immigration Advice Authority (IAA) - check if a specialist is registered with the Immigration Advice Authority on GOV.UK.

All Citizens Advice advisers are registered with the IAA. 

Before you get specialist immigration advice
Check if you have to pay for it and what the fees are. Getting help from Citizens Advice is always free.

If you decide to work with the specialist, make sure:

they confirm their advice in writing

they keep you updated on your case at least every 3 months

you have copies of any original documents you give them 

If the specialist is a solicitor, you can get advice about what will happen before, during and after your appointment on the Law Society’s website.

If you need help paying for a solicitor
You might be eligible for free legal help - this is called ‘legal aid’. You can get legal aid if you’re on a low income and you’re:

experiencing domestic abuse

applying for asylum

a victim of trafficking

If you’re under 18, you can get legal aid for all immigration and citizenship applications if you:

have been separated from your parents

aren’t being cared for by someone with parental responsibility for you

Check if you’re eligible for legal aid for your immigration problem on GOV.UK.

If you can get legal aid, make sure you choose an adviser with legal aid funding. If you choose an adviser without legal aid funding, you could end up spending thousands of pounds.

Help us improve our website
Take 5 minutes to tell us if you found what you needed on our website. Your feedback will help us give millions of people the information they need.

Problems with work if you have a Health and Care Worker visa
This advice applies to England. See advice for See advice forNorthern Ireland, See advice forScotland, See advice forWales

Help us improve our website
Take 5 minutes to tell us if you found what you needed on our website. Your feedback will help us give millions of people the information they need.

Changes to immigration rules
On 12 May 2025, the government announced plans to change immigration rules. The new rules about Health and Care Worker visas are set to change on 22 July 2025.

You might be affected by these changes if you work in the adult social care sector. Your job is in the adult social care sector if for example you’re a community support worker, home care worker or residential care worker. Check how the changes to immigration rules might affect you.

You have the same rights at work as any other worker. However, if you have a Health and Care Worker visa it can be hard to complain about your rights because your visa is linked to your job.

If you complain about your rights and your employer dismisses you, your visa will be cancelled.

If you’re worried about being dismissed, it might be best to find a different employer to sponsor you. When you’ve got a new employer, you might be able to take action against your old employer without risking your visa.

If you’ve been dismissed, you can check what to do when you’ve lost your job.

If you think you’re being exploited
If you’re having serious problems at work, you might be experiencing exploitation. Exploitation is also called human trafficking or modern slavery.

Every case of exploitation is different. There are signs you can look out for if something doesn’t feel right about your situation.

You might be experiencing exploitation if:

you’re being paid very little, or nothing at all

you owe money to your employer

you’re forced to work very long hours

you’ve been threatened with physical violence

you’re being forced to live in unsuitable accommodation

you’re forced to have sex with people

Example
Yasmin is from India. Her family helped her get a job in a care home in the UK. They paid £5,000 to an agency in India to arrange a job with accommodation and a visa. The agency said they’d need to pay even more money later.

When Yasmin got to the UK, the care home said her English was too bad to do the job. They said she had to work as a cleaner until her English improved. 

Now Yasmin works 40 hours a week as a cleaner. They pay her £100 a week with accommodation. She has to share her accommodation with 3 other people - they all sleep on camp beds.

Yasmin is still paying the agency in India. She’s also still paying her family back. She says she can’t return to India or leave her job because she won’t be able to pay the debt. 

Yasmin might have been trafficked to the UK for exploitation.

You should get help if you think you're being exploited.

If there was no job when you got to the UK
You might have been scammed.

When the Home Office find out there was no job, they’ll send you a letter saying your Health and Care Worker visa has been cancelled.

If you want to stay in the UK, you’ll need to find another employer to sponsor you. 

Talk to an adviser if you think you've been scammed.

Check you’re being paid the right amount
You should check you’re being paid at least the minimum rate for your job. 

If you’re not being paid the minimum rate for your job, you should also check you’re being paid at least the National Minimum Wage.

Check you’re being paid the minimum rate for your job
The minimum rate for your job depends on whether you’re either:

a care worker or home carer

a health worker - for example a doctor, nurse or health professional like a therapist, social worker or paramedic


If you're a care worker or home carer

If you're a health worker
Check you’re getting the National Minimum Wage
Your employer shouldn’t pay you less than the National Minimum Wage. If you’re 23 or over, they shouldn’t pay you less than the National Living Wage.

They might be paying you less if they’ve deducted money from your wages - for example for travel, training or accommodation.

You can check the National Minimum Wage and National Living Wage and what to do if you’re being paid less.

If your employer deducted money from your wages or charged you fees
You might have been charged fees or had money deducted by your employer. If you’re not sure what the fees or deduction is for, you can check your payslip or ask your employer. 

Your employer can only deduct money for something you’ve agreed to pay - you need to have agreed to it before they make the deduction. You can check what you’ve agreed to pay for by checking your employment contract or written agreement. 

Your employer has to pay you the National Minimum Wage - this means they usually can’t deduct money if it would mean they’re paying you less.

If your contract and Health and Care Worker Visa started on or after 9 April 2025, your employer has to ensure your salary is at least £25,000. 

If your employer deducts money for loans, investments or immigration charges, your salary must still be at least £25,000 after the deductions. They can deduct money for National Insurance, Income Tax and your pension contributions, even if it takes your salary below £25,000

You can check what to do if you’re having problems getting paid and how to complain.

If your employer has asked you to pay sponsor fees
You shouldn’t have to pay any of the following sponsor fees:

the Sponsor Licence fee

the Certificate of Sponsorship fee

the Immigration Skills Charge

Your employer also can't charge you for their time and effort paying these fees. This includes if they paid a third party to do this. They might call this an 'administration charge'.

If your employer is telling you to pay sponsor fees, you can talk to an adviser.

If a recruitment agency charged you fees
If you were recruited through an agency in the UK, there are rules they have to follow.

If you were recruited by an agency outside the UK, they have to follow the rules in the country where they’re based.

If you were recruited by an agency in the UK
The agency isn’t allowed to charge you a fee for finding you a job.

The agency is allowed to charge you fees for other things. For example they can charge fees for: 

helping you write your CV

helping you move to the UK

If you’ll be charged a fee for the agency’s work, they must tell you about the fee and you must agree to it before they start the work.

If a recruitment agency has charged you fees and you think they shouldn’t have, you can talk to an adviser.

Problems with how many hours you work
If you’re not sure how many hours you’re supposed to work, you should check your contract. It should tell you:

the number of hours your employer has to give you 

the usual times you’ll be working each week 

how much overtime you can do

You can find out how to check your employment contract.


If your employer isn’t giving you enough hours

If you think you’re working too many hours
If you’re having other problems at work
You can get help - for example you can get help with:

getting paid if you're too sick to work - check if you can get sick pay

getting paid when you're on holiday - check if you can get paid holiday

You can also get help if you’ve experienced discrimination - you can check if your problem at work is discrimination.

If you need help with a different problem, you can get help with problems at work.

If you want to find a new employer to sponsor you
Before you leave your job, you should check your employment contract to find out your responsibilities and rights. For example, you should check if your employer can charge you fees.

Talk to an adviser if you want to leave your job and you’re not sure about your rights.

You’ll need to find a new employer to sponsor you.

Check an employer is a licensed sponsor holder
Your new employer must be a licensed sponsor holder so they can give you a new Certificate of Sponsorship. You can find the list of licensed sponsor holders on the Autonomy website.

If an employer isn’t on the list, it’s best to find a different employer.

Check an employer is registered with the Care Quality Commission
Your new employer must be registered with the Care Quality Commission.

You can check if your employer is registered on the CQC website.

If you’re using a recruitment agency
You can check if the agency is on the list of ethical recruiters on GOV.UK. If they’re on the list it means they’ve said they’ll follow the government’s rules about recruitment.

Updating your Health and Care Worker visa
When you’ve found a new employer, you’ll need to apply to update your visa.

If your partner or children have visas that depend on your visa, you’ll need to update their visas as well.

Check how to update your visa on GOV.UK.

If the Home Office revoke your employer’s sponsorship licence
If the Home Office sends you a letter saying they’ve ‘revoked' your employer’s licence, this means they’ve cancelled it.

They'll usually cancel your visa 60 days after they cancelled your employer's licence.

You should email your nearest 'regional partnership' straight away. They can help you find a new employer who can sponsor you.

You can find details of the regional partnership in the letter from the Home Office. You can also find your regional partnership’s email address on GOV.UK.

Make sure your email includes:

your name

your current address

your contact details, for example your email address and phone number

the name of the employer who’s sponsoring your visa

If you find a new employer 
You should apply to switch to a Skilled Worker visa, using your new employer’s certificate of sponsorship. Make sure you apply before your current visa is cancelled. You’ll have to pay a fee - check the fees for Skilled Worker visas on GOV.UK. 

You can apply to switch to a Skilled Worker visa on GOV.UK.

You might be able to use the ‘priority service’ to get a decision on your visa application within 5 working days. There’s usually a fee for this, but the regional partnership might be able to get the priority service for free.

You can find out about the ‘priority service’ on GOV.UK.
Losing your job if you have a Health and Care Worker visa
This advice applies to England. See advice for See advice forNorthern Ireland, See advice forScotland, See advice forWales

Help us improve our website
Take 5 minutes to tell us if you found what you needed on our website. Your feedback will help us give millions of people the information they need.

Changes to immigration rules
On 12 May 2025, the government announced plans to change immigration rules. The new rules about Health and Care Worker visas are set to change on 22 July 2025.

You might be affected by these changes if you work in the adult social care sector. Your job is in the adult social care sector if for example you’re a community support worker, home care worker or residential care worker. Check how the changes to immigration rules might affect you.

If you’ve lost your job, your employer will tell the Home Office. 

If the Home Office decide to cancel your visa, they’ll send you a letter saying your Health and Care Worker visa has been cancelled. 

You should still get paid for the time you’ve worked - you can check how to get paid when you leave a job.

If your visa is cancelled
You’ll have 60 days left in the UK before you have to leave the country or get another visa. If you have less than 60 days left on your visa, you’ll have until your visa expires.

If you want to stay in the UK, you’ll need to find another health or care job with an employer who can sponsor you. 

If you got your Health and Care Worker visa before 11 March 2024, you had the right to bring your partner or child to the UK with you. They’ll be allowed to stay in the UK as long as you get a new sponsor before your visa ends.

When you’ve got a new sponsor, you’ll need to apply to update your Health and Care Worker visa. You can stay in the UK while you wait for a decision about your application. If your partner or children have visas that depend on your visa, you’ll need to update their visas as well.

You can check how to update your Health and Care Worker visa on GOV.UK.

If your employer lost their sponsorship licence
The Home Office will send you a letter to let you know. It might say they’ve ‘revoked' your employer’s licence - this means they’ve cancelled it.

They'll usually cancel your visa 60 days after they cancelled your employer's licence.

You should email your nearest 'regional partnership' straight away. They can help you find a new employer who can sponsor you.

You can find details of the regional partnership in the letter from the Home Office. You can also find your regional partnership’s email address on GOV.UK.

Make sure your email includes:

your name

your current address

your contact details, for example your email address and phone number

the name of the employer who’s sponsoring your visa

You can check what happens when your employer loses their sponsorship licence on GOV.UK.

If your employer charged you fees or deducted money from your wages
You might have been charged fees or had money deducted by your employer. If you’re not sure what the fees or deduction is for, you can check your payslip or ask your employer. 

Your employer can only deduct money for something you’ve agreed to pay - you need to have agreed to it before they make the deduction. You can check what you’ve agreed to pay for by checking your employment contract or a written agreement. 

Your employer has to pay you the National Minimum Wage - this means they usually can’t deduct money if it would mean they’ve paid you less. 

If the deduction was for training, your employer might be able to make a deduction that means paying you less if:

you’ve chosen to leave your job 

you’ve been dismissed because of your behaviour

Your employer has to pay you a minimum rate after deductions. This rate depends on the type of job you have and when your contract and visa started. Check your employer is paying you enough.

If you think your employer has paid you less than they should have, you can get help with getting paid when you leave a job.

If your employer has asked you to pay sponsor fees
You shouldn’t have to pay any of the following sponsor fees:

the Sponsor Licence fee

the Certificate of Sponsorship fee

the Immigration Skills Charge

Your employer also can't pass on their administrative charges for these fees.

If your employer is telling you to pay sponsor fees, you can talk to an adviser.

Finding a new employer to sponsor you
You’ll need to find a new employer to sponsor you if you want to stay in the UK.

Your new employer must be a licensed sponsor holder so they can give you a new Certificate of Sponsorship. You can find the list of licensed sponsor holders on the Autonomy website.

If an employer isn’t on the list, it’s best to find a different employer. 

Your new employer must also be registered with the Care Quality Commission (CQC).

You can check if your employer is registered on the CQC website.

If you’re using a recruitment agency
You can check if the agency is on the list of ethical recruiters on GOV.UK. If they’re on the list it means they’ve said they’ll follow the government’s rules about recruitment.

Updating your Health and Care Worker visa
When you’ve found a new employer, you’ll need to apply to update your visa.

If your partner or children have visas that depend on your visa, you’ll need to update their visas as well.

Check how to update your visa on GOV.UK.

If you have accommodation as part of your job
You should check your employment contract to find out what happens with your accommodation.

Your landlord or employer will usually send you an eviction notice. You’ll need to check how much notice they need to give before you have to move out. 

If you haven’t got an eviction notice, you can check how much notice you need to give your landlord or employer.

If you can’t find the information in your employment contract, you might have a separate written agreement. 

If you don’t move out by the agreed date, your landlord will usually need a court order to evict you. They might be able to evict you without a court order if:

your accommodation is free

you live with your employer

you live with a client you were caring for

Talk to an adviser if you’re worried about losing your accommodation.

Check if your dismissal was unfair
Your dismissal might be unfair if your employer either:

ended your job without a good legal reason

didn’t follow a fair procedure

You can usually only challenge a dismissal if you’ve worked for your employer for at least 2 years.

If you’ve worked for your employer for less than 2 years, you might still be able to challenge a dismissal if it’s ‘automatically unfair’. Your dismissal will be automatically unfair if, for example, you were dismissed because:

you were pregnant or on maternity leave

you tried to get your rights at work - for example if you asked to be paid the National Minimum Wage

You can check if your dismissal is unfair.

If you’re struggling with living costs
You have ‘no recourse to public funds’ - this means you usually can’t claim benefits. If you’ve worked in the UK for at least 2 years, you might be able to claim some benefits.

If you’ve worked in the UK for at least 2 years
If you’ve paid enough National Insurance contributions, you might be able to claim either:

new style Jobseeker’s Allowance - check if you can claim new style Jobseeker’s Allowance

new style Employment and Support Allowance, if you’re sick or disabled - check if you can claim new style Employment and Support Allowance

If you’re struggling to afford food
You can get free food from a food bank - find out how to use a food bank.


You might also be able to get help from local organisations - for example, you could ask your local church or mosque for help.

If you have children under 18
If you have children under 18, you might be able to get help from your local council. You should get help from an adviser first.

Get help from an adviser
Talk to an adviser to get help.
